Pharmacology of In t r aveno u s
Se dative/Anesthet ic
M e d i c a t i o n s U s e d i n Or a l
Surgery
Joseph A. Giovannitti Jr, DMD
KEYWORDS
 Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA)  Pharmacology of sedative/anesthetic drugs
 Emergence delirium  Dental sedation

KEY POINTS

INTRODUCTION
Patients have historically been considered to be in
a state of general anesthesia when the following
parameters were met: unconsciousness, analgesia, amnesia, immobility, and attenuation of
the autonomic response to noxious stimulation.
This was, and is, accomplished easily by the
inhalation of potent halogenated hydrocarbons
such as isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane.
In the past, when inhalational anesthesia was not
desired or was contraindicated, a balanced technique was advocated using various intravenous
drugs to achieve the desired level of anesthesia.
The evolution of total intravenous anesthesia
(TIVA) began when Stanley Drummond-Jackson,
using methohexital in the UK, and Adrian Hubbell,
using sodium pentothal in the United States, first
used incremental boluses of these drugs to

produce unconsciousness for dental surgery.
These introductions were followed by the introduction of intravenous drug combinations to
produce sedation by Niels Jorgensen, Leonard
Monheim, and C. Richard Bennett. With the
advent of designer medications and sophisticated
computer-aided technologies and monitoring,
TIVA has come into its own. During TIVA, each
individual agent is typically selected for its ability
to achieve a particular parameter of general anesthesia. Drugs such as propofol are used to induce
and maintain unconsciousness, opioids are used
for analgesia, benzodiazepines are selected for
their amnestic qualities, and muscle relaxants
produce immobility. The classic induction agents,
thiopental and methohexital, have been largely
supplanted by propofol as the primary agent for
the production and maintenance of unconsciousness. Adjunctive agents such as fentanyl,

Department of Dental Anesthesiology, Center for Patients with Special Needs, University of Pittsburgh School
of Dental Medicine, 3501 Terrace Street, G-89 Salk Hall, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
E-mail address: jag74@pitt.edu
Oral Maxillofacial Surg Clin N Am 25 (2013) 439–451
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.coms.2013.03.004
1042-3699/13/$
– see front
matter
Ó 2013 Elsevier Inc.
All rights
reserved.
Downloaded
for PD Hinduja
Hospital
(library@hindujahospital.com)
at National
Hospital
& Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

oralmaxsurgery.theclinics.com

 Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) is a technique whose time has come because of the advent of
ultra–short-acting drugs and computerized infusion technology.
 Patients may be sedated to any desired level, maintained there for indefinite periods, and recovered
to near baseline within minutes.
 Future trends in TIVA may include patient-controlled sedation, whereby patients sedate themselves
with an infusion device similar to those used for postoperative analgesia.
 The future may also bring titration of sedatives to target blood levels, leading to more precise dosing
and greater efficiency.

440

Giovannitti
remifentanil, midazolam, ketamine, and dexmedetomidine are used for analgesia, amnesia, immobility, and attenuation of the autonomic stress
response. This article highlights these drugs,
explores the rationale for their use, and discusses
their clinical usefulness in an office-based setting.

not requiring the presence of GABA. These actions
produce what is known as barbiturate anesthesia and may explain the lower margin of safety
and steeper dose-response curve relative to
benzodiazepines.

Pharmacologic Effects

THIOPENTAL
Thiopental is an ultra–short-acting thiobarbiturate
first introduced into clinical practice by Dr Ralph
Waters in 1934 (Fig. 1). Its use ushered in the age
of intravenous anesthesia. It is the prototypical
intravenous induction agent against which all
others are compared. Although currently no longer
being manufactured, it is necessary to understand
its pharmacology to understand the rationale for
the use of induction agents and their evolution
into drugs that are now used for induction and
maintenance of anesthesia via continuous infusion
techniques. Until it was supplanted by propofol in
popularity and usefulness, thiopental was the standard intravenous induction agent for general anesthesia for years. Despite its widespread use, it had
detractors. After the attack on Pearl Harbor,
thiopental was maligned as “the ideal form of
euthanasia in war surgery”1 because of its propensity to produce cardiovascular collapse in
extremely hypovolemic patients. More recently,
thiopental was part of the regimen for lethal
injection executions in the United States. Hospira
(Lake Forest, IL), the sole manufacturer of thiopental, removed the drug from the market when
the government of Italy (where thiopental was
produced) demanded that Hospira guarantee that
thiopental would not be used for lethal injection.
This development prompted the company to halt
manufacture of the drug.2

Thiopental rapidly achieves therapeutic plasma
concentrations and can induce unconsciousness
within 15 to 30 seconds. After a single intravenous
induction dose of 4 mg/kg, the clinical duration of
effect is between 20 and 30 minutes. Because
thiopental is highly lipid soluble, it has the ability
to enter tissues at a rate proportional to blood
flow. The vessel-rich group, which includes the
brain, receives the highest proportion of the
cardiac output relative to body mass (Fig. 2).
Thus it achieves the highest concentration of
thiopental following intravenous injection, and its
effects are exerted almost immediately. Redistribution to the more poorly perfused tissues such
as muscle, and later fat, results in a rapid decline
in the concentration of the drug, which terminates
the effect. Because the drug accumulates in fatty
tissue, especially after repeated administration or
continuous infusion, the clinical duration and
recovery time may be prolonged in obese patients.

Cardiovascular Effects
Peripheral vasodilation is the primary effect of an
induction dose of thiopental. This dose is usually
accompanied by a reflex increase in heart rate.
Mean arterial pressure may be unchanged or
slightly diminished. Further myocardial depression
occurs with higher doses, and blood pressure may
decrease precipitously. Hypovolemic patients are
especially susceptible to profound hypotension
and cardiovascular collapse.

Mechanism of Action
Many of the pharmacologic effects of barbiturates
closely resemble the effects of benzodiazepines.
Barbiturates enhance gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA)–activated chloride ion channel opening
by acting at specific barbiturate binding sites on
the GABAA receptor complex, leading to hyperpolarization and decreased neuronal firing.3 Barbiturates also act directly on the chloride channel,

Fig. 1. Thiopental, the prototypical induction agent.

Fig. 2. Thiopental distribution in different tissues.
VRG, vessel rich group.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Pharmacology of Medications in Oral Surgery
Respiratory Effects
Thiopental produces dose-dependent respiratory
depression via decreased minute ventilation. Both
tidal volume and respiratory rate are decreased,
and apnea ensues, especially in the presence of
other respiratory-depressant drugs. Airway reflex
activity may be increased with a predisposition to
coughing and laryngospasm.

Other Effects
Thiopental is an anticonvulsant and can be used to
treat patients with status epilepticus. It also
reduces cerebral blood flow, intracranial pressure,
and cerebral metabolic rate. It is hyperalgesic, and
patients may exhibit heightened responses to pain
stimulation. Analgesics must be given concurrently
with barbiturates to ensure adequate increase of
the pain threshold. Thiopental is highly alkaline
and care must be taken to ensure that the drug is
only given intravenously. Extravasation into the
tissues may result in tissue necrosis, and intraarterial injection results in severe vasospasm. Thiopental also releases histamine, which may produce
hives, urticaria, edema, and bronchospasm. An
interesting, but common, effect of thiopental is
the perception of a garlic or onion taste after the
drug has been administered.

Contraindications
Patients with chronic obstructive lung disease or
difficult airway predictors are adversely affected
after thiopental administration. Thiopental produces
profound hypotension and circulatory collapse in
patients with cardiac instability or hemorrhagic
shock. Because thiopental releases histamine, it is
contraindicated in patients with status asthmaticus
and in patients with poorly controlled asthma. Barbiturates are absolutely contraindicated in cases of
acute intermittent porphyria. They stimulate the
formation of D-aminolevulinic acid synthetase,
leading to the accumulation of porphyrins and
porphyrin precursors, and an acute exacerbation
of the disease.

METHOHEXITAL
Methohexital is an ultra–short-acting oxybarbiturate similar in effect to thiopental, but approximately 2.5 times as potent and much shorter
acting. An induction dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg rapidly
produces unconsciousness for 5 to 7 minutes.
Rapid redistribution is responsible for its abrupt
termination of action. Advantages compared with
thiopental include a more rapid recovery and clearance, no histamine release, less accumulation and
saturation of peripheral tissues, and a more

favorable context-sensitive half-time, making it
suitable for maintenance of anesthesia via continuous infusion. An infusion of 50 to 150 mg/kg/min
for a short-duration procedure lasting 60 minutes
or less produces a recovery comparable with a
similar propofol infusion. Thus, methohexital is
more suitable for outpatient procedures than thiopental. The major disadvantage of methohexital is
the frequency of excitatory phenomena such as
coughing, hiccoughing, tremors and twitching,
heightened airway reflexes, and laryngospasm.
Methohexital is also associated with pain on injection and phlebitis. Despite these adverse effects,
methohexital was the mainstay of anesthesia for
oral surgery for decades, given either as a full
induction dose or as an incremental bolus to
deepen the level of sedation as needed. Methohexital has been supplanted by propofol for dental
sedation and anesthesia. However, with the
frequent drug shortages, it benefits the practitioner
to become familiar with this drug if and when a
backup medication becomes necessary.

PROPOFOL
Propofol is a 2,6-diisopropylphenol anesthetic drug
available in several generic forms and the brand
name Diprivan (APP Pharmaceuticals, Schaumberg, IL). Propofol is the most commonly used
intravenous anesthetic, producing unconsciousness within 40 seconds after a single induction
dose of 2 to 2.5 mg/kg, followed by a rapid recovery
with minimal postoperative confusion. It is formulated in an oil-in-water emulsion containing
soybean oil, glycerol, and egg lecithin and has a
characteristic milky white appearance. This preparation has the potential to become a culture
medium for bacterial growth, so any unused portion
must be discarded 6 hours after puncturing the vial
to prevent sepsis.

Mechanism of Action
Propofol is an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor inhibitor and an agonist at the b1 subunit
of the GABAA receptor. Its termination of activity
is similar to thiopental in that it is rapidly redistributed (distribution half-life 2–4 minutes), resulting
in rapid recovery following induction or maintenance doses. It is metabolized in the liver (elimination half-life 3–12 hours), but the clearance of
propofol exceeds liver blood flow, suggesting
some extrahepatic metabolism. Other effects of
propofol include pain on injection, amnesia, and
possibly some antiemetic effects. It has a favorable
context-sensitive half-time, which makes it ideal for
maintenance of deep sedation or general anesthesia via continuous infusion.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

441

442

Giovannitti
Cardiovascular Effects
Propofol has some cardiovascular effects, specifically a reduction in stroke volume and peripheral
vasodilation that may produce a significant
decrease in systemic blood pressure. There is no
compensatory increase in heart rate, as seen with
thiopental. It therefore should be used with caution
in the elderly or hypovolemic patient, or those with
limited cardiac reserve.

Respiratory Effects
Propofol is a potent respiratory depressant, producing a significant reduction in tidal volume and
apnea in 30% of patients following an induction
dose. Unlike thiopental, propofol does not release
histamine and may be used safely in asthmatic
patients. Propofol does not promote airway hyperactivity, making patients less susceptible to
laryngospasm compared with thiopental and methohexital. Propofol is useful in deepening sedation
levels to aid in the management of laryngospasm.

Other Effects
Propofol is known for its amnestic and antiemetic
properties. Propofol acts as an antiemetic during
administration and may be helpful in the intraoperative management of patients with a significant
history of postoperative nausea and vomiting. It
is also useful as a treatment modality for patients
who are actively nauseated in the immediate
recovery period.
Propofol causes pain during injection, which can
vary from mild to severe. The drug irritates the
venous intima and activates the kallikrein-kinin
system to increase bradykinin production. Pain
on injection may be attenuated by slowly injecting
the drug into a large vein, rapidly flushing with
intravenous fluid, and the prior administration of
intravenous lidocaine. However, to be effective,
lidocaine should be held for a time within the
vein before being released into the systemic circulation. Injecting lidocaine while the tourniquet is
still applied, waiting for a few minutes, and then
releasing the tourniquet before the administration
of propofol may accomplish this.
Propofol infusion syndrome has been reported
in critically ill patients undergoing prolonged sedation with propofol. Its features include rhabdomyolysis, severe metabolic acidosis, and renal
and cardiac failure.4 It has most often appeared
in pediatric patients, but has also more recently
been reported in adults. Propofol infusion syndrome is a multifactorial process with critical
neurologic or inflammatory illnesses and prolonged propofol infusions as initiating factors,

and concomitant catecholamine and glucocorticoid administration as triggering factors. The syndrome may manifest with infusions of more than
5 mg/kg/h for a period of more than 48 hours.
There has been concern that propofol should
not be used in patients with egg allergy because
of its formulation containing egg lecithin. The
package insert for Diprivan states that the drug
“is contraindicated in patients with allergies to
eggs, egg products, soybeans or soy products.”5
However, a review of allergic reactions during
anesthesia by Hepner and Castells6 reveals that
the incidence of propofol allergy during anesthesia
is 1:60,000, and the cause is likely to be the presence of isopropyl groups and/or phenols, not egg
or soy allergies. In addition, most patients with egg
allergy are allergic to the protein, ovalbumin, found
in egg whites. Egg lecithin, found in egg yolks, has
a low allergic potential and its formulation in propofol is highly purified. Lizaso and colleagues7
reported that skin-prick and intradermal testing
with propofol and its lipid vehicle were negative
in 25 patients with documented egg allergy.
Current evidence suggests that patients with an
egg allergy are no more likely to develop anaphylaxis than the nonallergic population when
exposed to propofol.

ETOMIDATE
Etomidate is a short-acting intravenous anesthetic, chemically unrelated to other intravenous
induction agents. It is similar pharmacokinetically
to thiopental, but with less respiratory depression
and minimal cardiovascular effect. Therefore, it is
used primarily for induction of anesthesia (0.2–
0.6 mg/kg) in patients in whom hypotension
cannot be tolerated. It maintains hemodynamic
stability and does not release histamine, making
it the drug of choice for induction of anesthesia
in hypovolemic patients or those with cardiopulmonary compromise. A severe side effect is the
inhibition of steroidogenesis, making it unsuitable
for prolonged maintenance administration. This
effect may even occur following induction doses,
which could potentially impair the patient’s ability
to respond appropriately to stress. The potential
for this side effect severely limits the routine use
of etomidate. Other disruptive effects of etomidate
include a high incidence of nausea and vomiting,
pain and phlebitis on injection, hiccough, and
disruptive myoclonic movements.

OPIOIDS
Thomas Sydenham, a physician deemed the
English Hippocrates, once profoundly asserted

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Pharmacology of Medications in Oral Surgery
that, “Among the remedies which it has pleased
Almighty God to give to man to relieve his
sufferings, none is so universal and so efficacious
as opium.” Opioids have the ability to relieve pain,
produce sedation and euphoria, alter the mood,
attenuate the cardiovascular stress response,
and coincidentally produce profound respiratory
depression. The primary site of opioid activity
occurs in the central nervous system (CNS) and
the gut. Since 1973, it has been known that the
activation of opioid-specific receptors in these
areas is responsible for the pharmacologic actions
of opioids (Box 1). The CNS effects include
analgesia and sedation, changes in mood, and
mental clouding. Opioids attenuate all types of
pain regardless of origin or intensity, increase the
pain threshold, and alter the affective response
to pain. Gastrointestinal (GI) effects include
decreased GI motility, which may produce constipation and delayed gastric emptying. This effect
could potentially alter the patient’s nil-by-mouth
status. Opioids stimulate the chemoreceptor

Box 1
Opioid receptors and their actions
 m1
 Analgesia (supraspinal, spinal)
 Miosis
 Urinary retention
 Nausea and vomiting
 Pruritus
 m2
 Sedation
 Respiratory depression
 GI motility decrease
 s
 Dysphoria
 Psychotomimesis
 d
 Analgesia (supraspinal, spinal)
 Alterations of affective behavior
 k
 Analgesia (supraspinal, spinal)
 Sedation
 GI motility decrease
 Psychotomimesis
The primary site of opioid activity is in the CNS
and bowel.

trigger zone and may produce nausea and
vomiting. Esophageal sphincter tone is reduced,
which may lead to vomiting and aspiration during
anesthesia. Opioids may also increase biliary
duct pressure and sphincter of Oddi tone and
produce severe epigastric or abdominal pain in
susceptible individuals.

Cardiovascular Effects
Opioids are generally accepted to promote cardiovascular and hemodynamic stability and are important in attenuating the cardiovascular response to
surgical stress. A m-receptor–mediated modulation
of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis reduces
may prevent adrenocorticotropic hormone release,
resulting in decreased sympathetic tone.8 Opioids
may also act directly on the vagal nuclei and inhibit
the SA-node to produce bradycardia in most
cases. These effects may produce hypotension in
some individuals. Histamine-releasing opioids
such as morphine and meperidine may also
produce postural hypotensive changes secondary
to peripheral vasodilation.

Respiratory Effects
Opioids are primary and continuous depressants of
respiration through a direct and dose-dependent
depression of the medullary respiratory center.
Respiratory rate is slowed more in proportion to
decreases in tidal volume. The net effect is a significant reduction in minute ventilation. Opioids
obtund the respiratory center’s hypercapnic
response, diminishing the patient’s drive to breathe
as carbon dioxide levels increase. Thus, opioidsensitive patients, or those receiving high doses,
may become apneic even while conscious, but
may breathe on command. Respiratory depression
with opioids may be further enhanced by the
administration of high doses, the concomitant
administration of other CNS-depressant drugs,
and in sensitive patients such as the elderly or those
with severe renal disease.
Opioids depress upper airway reflexes and may
be valuable in reducing the coughing spasms
sometimes seen during the sedation of patients
with reactive airway disease. They also may be
helpful in attenuating laryngeal and bronchoconstrictive reflexes.

Other Effects
In addition to the effects of GI immobility and
nausea and vomiting mentioned earlier, opioids
exert a variety of ancillary effects. For example,
opioids alone have minimal effect on intracranial
pressure, but, in instances of closed head injury
or with severe opioid-induced respiratory

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

443

444

Giovannitti
depression, intracranial pressure increases with
hypercapnia.
All opioids are capable of increasing skeletal
muscle tone; however, this phenomenon is most
often associated with the rapid administration of
high doses of fentanyl, sufentanil, and remifentanil.
Chest wall rigidity results in decreased lung compliance, decreased functional residual capacity, and
vocal cord closure, which makes ventilation difficult
and increases the risk of hypoxemia. Chest wall
rigidity should be immediately recognized, and, if
ventilation is difficult, muscle relaxation or reversal
should be considered. The concomitant administration of benzodiazepines may help prevent
rigidity.
A clinical sign of opioid use is pupillary constriction. This effect is mediated through the EdingerWestphal nucleus of the occulomotor nerve, and
is pathognomonic of their use. However, opioids
do not increase intraocular pressure, and can
prevent increases in intraocular pressure during
intubation.9
Allergic reactions to opioids are rare. Most
allergiclike reactions to opioids are related to the
histamine-releasing drugs such as morphine and
meperidine. Typical wheal and flare reactions
may be noticed, especially along the vein as
the drug travels centrally. Dilation of cutaneous
blood vessels in the face, neck, and thorax is common, producing flushing and redness that may
mimic an allergic response. Histamine release is
also associated with pruritus; however, non–
histamine-releasing opioids can produce itching
as well. Facial itching is common and can be
severe enough to be disruptive to dental surgery.
The mechanism of facial itching is not known,
but mediation through m-receptors has been
proposed.10

MORPHINE
Morphine is the prototypical opioid with which all
other opioids are compared (Table 1). Once an
integral part of a sedation regimen for prolonged
procedures, morphine has no application in
modern TIVA procedures. Its main usefulness is

in acute pain management. Although a dose of
10 mg (0.1 mg/kg) provides optimal pain relief,
the dose should be titrated intravenously to effect
following anesthesia in the immediate postoperative period. The onset of morphine is slow: 5 to
10 minutes following intravenous administration
and up to 20 minutes following intramuscular
injection. It produces analgesia, euphoria, and
sedation lasting from 2 to 4 hours. Its use may
be limited by side effects such as histamine
release, postural hypotension, and nausea and
vomiting.

MEPERIDINE
Meperidine is the prototype of the phenylpiperidine series of opioids, which includes fentanyl,
sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil (Fig. 3). For
years meperidine was the mainstay of intravenous
sedation regimens for procedures of all durations.
It has a more rapid onset than morphine, within
3 minutes following intravenous administration,
making it more easily titratable than morphine. It
is 10 times less potent than morphine, producing
sedation and analgesia lasting 45 to 90 minutes.
Meperidine was first investigated as an atropinelike agent and is unique among opioids in that it
may produce tachycardia and drying of secretions. It also releases histamine, and may produce
orthostatic hypotension with rapid position
change. Severe asthma is a relative contraindication. Other side effects include dysphoria, especially in the absence of pain, and nausea and
vomiting. Meperidine is associated with increased
neuronal activity that may result in CNS excitation.
Its metabolite, normeperidine, is twice as potent
as meperidine in producing CNS excitation and
convulsions. Meperidine is contraindicated in
patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors
because concentrations of normeperidine are
increased with these drugs.
Although meperidine is still used on a limited
basis for dental sedation, its main use is currently
in the management of postanesthetic shivering.
Opioids in general reduce thermoregulation
thresholds similarly to potent inhalational agents.

Table 1
Comparative effects of commonly used opioids in oral surgery

Comparative potency
Peak Effect (min)
Duration (h)
Half-life (h)

Meperidine

Morphine

Fentanyl

Sufentanil

Alfentanil

Remifentanil

0.1
5–7
2–3
3–4

1
20–30
3–4
2–4

75–125
3–5
0.5–1
1.5–6

500–1000
3–5
0.5–1
2.5–3

10–25
1.5–2
0.2–0.3
1–2

250
1.5–2
0.1–0.2
0.15–0.3

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Pharmacology of Medications in Oral Surgery
depression. Fentanyl may be difficult to titrate to
effect because it produces little or no euphoria.
There is a tendency to overshoot the goal if the
clinician waits to see a clinical effect from fentanyl.
Thus, dosing should be done on an empiric basis.

SUFENTANIL
Sufentanil is an ultrapotent opioid with a similar
profile to fentanyl, but 10 times as potent. It may
be used readily as a substitute for fentanyl, with
10 mg of sufentanil being equivalent to 100 mg of
fentanyl. Its context-sensitive half-time is favorable enough to permit its use as a continuous infusion agent during TIVA.

ALFENTANIL
Alfentanil is 10 times less potent than fentanyl, with
1000 mg of alfentanil being equivalent to 100 mg of
fentanyl. It also has a similar clinical profile to
fentanyl and may be used in lieu of fentanyl in a
sedation regimen. Alfentanil also has a contextsensitive half-time compatible with a continuous
infusion technique.

REMIFENTANIL

However, meperidine is unique in that it can terminate shivering in 70% to 80% of cases. The exact
mechanism is unknown, but may be related to a
k-receptor–mediated reduction in the shivering
threshold and to a2b-receptor agonism.11

Remifentanil is an ultra–short-acting opioid that is
2.5 times as potent as fentanyl and is ideally suited
for continuous infusion techniques. It is unique in
that it contains ester linkages, which are hydrolyzed in the plasma by nonspecific esterases that
profoundly limit its duration of action. Its short
context-sensitive half-time results in recovery
within minutes, even after hours of infusion. It is
primarily used for maintenance of deep sedation
in doses of 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg/min, or general anesthesia in doses of 0.05 to 2.0 mg/kg/min. It may
also be used for the induction of general anesthesia in bolus doses of 1 mg/kg. Combined with
propofol, this dosing regimen can produce excellent intubating conditions without the need for
muscle relaxants.

FENTANYL

BENZODIAZEPINES

Fentanyl is the most popular and useful opioid in
anesthesia today. It is used in every situation from
moderate dental sedation to cardiothoracic surgery. It is approximately 100 times more potent
than morphine, and has a rapid onset and short
duration. It produces excellent analgesia and is
useful during induction of anesthesia to provide
background sedation and to attenuate the systemic
effects of intubation. Fentanyl provides cardiovascular stability, but may produce bradycardia. It
produces profound dose-dependent respiratory

Benzodiazepines form the basis of sedative drugs
and techniques because of their selectivity of
effect and high margin of safety (Fig. 4). Benzodiazepines exert their effect at the GABA-receptor
complex to produce the clinical effects of anxiolysis, sedation, amnesia, anticonvulsant activity,
and skeletal muscle relaxation. Benzodiazepine
receptors are linked to a specific GABA-receptor
subtype, the GABAA receptor. Binding at the
GABAA receptor facilitates GABA-activated membrane hyperpolarization by enhancing chloride ion

Fig. 3. Phenylpiperidine series of opioids.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

445

446

Giovannitti

Fig. 4. Typical benzodiazepines and their reversal agent have similar chemical structures.

influx through the chloride channel associated with
the macromolecular receptor complex.

Cardiovascular Effects
Benzodiazepines exert little effect on cardiovascular parameters in therapeutic doses. Excessive
doses and concomitant use with other sedatives
may result in cardiovascular system depression.
Benzodiazepines are useful in attenuating the
cardiovascular stress response.

Respiratory Effects
Benzodiazepines have little effect on the respiratory system, but can cause respiratory depression
in a dose-dependent manner, or when administered in conjunction with other CNS-depressant
drugs. Midazolam has been associated with
respiratory depression and apnea, and clinically
significant respiratory depression can occur
when combined with opioids.12

Other Effects
Paradoxic reactions to benzodiazepines have
been seen in all patients, but most notably in the
elderly and pediatric populations. These reactions,
also described as idiosyncratic, are manifested as
excitement, agitation and confusion, irritability,
rage, and hostility. The cause for these unusual
reactions is not well known, but may be likened
to the disinhibitory effects sometimes seen with
alcohol. Caution should be exercised when administering benzodiazepines to these groups.
Diazepam has been associated with pain on
injection and an increased incidence of phlebitis
following intravenous administration. This effect
is caused by its formulation in a propylene glycol
solvent that is irritating to veins. Phlebitis is more
likely to occur when using hand veins and with
repeated injections. Patients who are smokers,
the elderly, and those taking oral contraceptives
are most likely to develop phlebitis. At the height
of its popularity, diazepam-induced phlebitis was
a leading cause of anesthetic-related lawsuits.
Benzodiazepines are contraindicated in
pregnancy and are classified as pregnancy

category D, except for triazolam, which is pregnancy category X.13 If sedation or anesthesia is
to be considered during pregnancy, benzodiazepines should be avoided. Except for lorazepam
and oxazepam, benzodiazepines are also found
in the breast milk of lactating mothers, which could
result in the unwanted sedation of the infant. If
benzodiazepines are to be used as part of a sedative or anesthetic regimen in these patients, the
risk may be decreased by administering the
medication immediately after the mother feeds
the infant, or during periods in which the infant is
asleep for long periods. A safer alternative would
be to have the mother self-express and store the
milk for later use before procedure, and selfexpress and discard the milk for 3 to 4 half-lives
of the drug following the procedure.
Aside from the drug interactions involving other
CNS depressants, interactions involving the
cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme system are the
most significant. Benzodiazepines are biotransformed in the liver by the CYP3A4 isoenzymes.
Drugs such as rifampin and carbamazepine induce
these enzymes in the liver and gut, reducing the
bioavailability of various benzodiazepines by up to
96%.14 Triazolam is so effectively metabolized in
the gut by these induced enzymes that its bioavailability is reduced to only 12% of normal.15 The
clinical implications of this include loss of seizure
control, and reduced or lack of effectiveness of
benzodiazepines.
Drugs including calcium channel blockers, azole
antifungals, macrolide antibiotics, protease inhibitors, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
inhibit the CYP3A4 isoenzymes. Thus, coadministration of benzodiazepines in patients taking these
agents could result in increased bioavailability with
significant augmentation and prolongation of their
effects. Patients taking any of these drugs may
exhibit extreme oversedation and respiratory
depression.

DIAZEPAM
Diazepam is the prototypical benzodiazepine that
is noted for excellent anxiolysis and sedation of

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Pharmacology of Medications in Oral Surgery
moderate duration. It was the mainstay of most
enteral and parenteral sedation regimens for years,
and is still used occasionally for this purpose.
However, its many drawbacks have caused it to
be supplanted by newer agents, such as midazolam and triazolam. Diazepam is a water-insoluble
drug that is formulated with propylene glycol for
injection. This formulation makes it unsuitable for
effective intramuscular injection because of poor
absorption. Propylene glycol is also known to
contribute to pain on injection, venous irritation,
and thrombophlebitis. Diazepam has 3 active
metabolites: oxazepam, nordiazepam, and desmethyldiazepam. Their half-lives range from 22 to
100 hours, which may account for residual hangover effects sometimes seen after diazepam
administration.

administered in a low dose. These effects are
caused by the binding of ketamine to NMDA receptors in the CNS.
Peak plasma concentrations of ketamine are
achieved in about 1 minute after intravenous
administration and in about 5 minutes following
intramuscular administration. The pharmacokinetic
profile of ketamine is similar in both adults and
children, conforming to a classic 2-compartment
model. Termination of activity occurs through
slow redistribution to the peripheral compartment.
Thus, the clinical effects of ketamine begin to
wane in about 15 minutes after intravenous administration and in about 30 to 120 minutes following
intramuscular injection. The elimination half-life of
ketamine is 2 to 3 hours in adults, but children
metabolize the drug more rapidly.

MIDAZOLAM

Cardiovascular effects
Ketamine exerts sympathomimetic effects on the
cardiovascular system, resulting in mild to moderate increases in blood pressure, heart rate, and
cardiac output. Coronary perfusion increases
along with myocardial oxygen consumption. Ketamine is therefore relatively contraindicated in
patients with uncontrolled hypertension, arteriosclerotic heart disease, and severe congestive
heart failure. Hypertensive responses to ketamine
may be exaggerated by rapid intravenous bolus
injection and may be minimized by slow administration of low-dose ketamine.

Midazolam is the benzodiazepine of choice for TIVA
because of its water solubility and excellent sedative, anxiolytic, and amnestic effects. It has a short
elimination half-life (2.5 hours) and lacks significant
active metabolites. Midazolam can be counted on
to produce reliable antegrade amnesia, attenuate
the cardiovascular response to stress, and suppress the psychotomimetic effects of ketamine.
Unlike diazepam, it is well absorbed intramuscularly and does not cause pain on injection or venous
irritation. Its effects may be intensified in the presence of CYP3A4 inhibitors. Midazolam is also
available as an oral elixir, which is an effective
premedicant in doses of 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg
(maximum 20 mg) for pediatric and special-needs
populations.

ADJUNCTIVE AGENTS
Ketamine
Ketamine is a water-soluble phencyclidine derivative first synthesized in 1963. It produces a characteristic dissociative state characterized by
profound analgesia, amnesia, and catalepsy. Its
racemic form, containing equal amounts of its
dextro and levo isomers, is used clinically. Its high
degree of lipid solubility enables it to enter the
CNS rapidly. Ketamine is thought to produce its
unique clinical state by inducing dissociation
between the thalamnoneocortical and limbic
systems, thus preventing the higher centers from
perceiving visual, auditory, and painful stimuli.16
The result is a cataleptic state manifested by
a vacant stare, glassy eyes, and horizontal
nystagmus. Patients may appear to be removed
or detached from their physical beings, but may still
respond to command when ketamine has been

Respiratory effects
Ketamine preserves spontaneous respiration and
enhances the muscular tone of the upper airway.
Protective airway reflexes are preserved. Respiratory depression is rarely associated with ketamine
administration, although it may occur after rapid
intravenous bolus injection or with the concomitant use of opioids. Ketamine is a bronchodilator,
decreasing airway resistance by direct smooth
muscle dilation, increased circulating catecholamines, and inhibition of vagal outflow. The effect
of ketamine on ventilation is clinically insignificant,
although the carbon dioxide response curve is
shifted to the right. The slope of the curve remains
unchanged, indicating that hypercarbic respiratory
stimulation remains intact but may require a
slightly higher PaCO2 for a ventilatory response.
Ketamine stimulates salivary and tracheobronchial
secretions that may induce laryngospasm. These
effects can be adequately controlled by the
concomitant administration of an antisialogogue.
Although laryngospasm is a possible side effect
of ketamine administration and is potentially life
threatening, a literature review conducted by
Green and Johnson17 revealed only 2 cases of

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

447

448

Giovannitti
laryngospasm in 11,589 pediatric patients who
required intubation. Because upper airway protective reflexes remain intact, there seems to be minimal risk of the aspiration of gastric contents. In the
20 years of ketamine use studied by Green and
Johnson,17 only 2 cases of aspiration were found.
Neuromuscular effects
Ketamine produces skeletal muscle hypertonicity
and rigidity, which may interfere with dental procedures because of inability to open the mouth. This
phenomenon seems to be dose related, and
increasing the ketamine dose or the addition of
other sedative agents alleviates this problem.
Random movement unrelated to surgical or painful
stimuli often occurs with ketamine administration.
This random movement may be mistaken for an
inadequate sedation level when it is unrelated to
the dental procedure. Myoclonus, twitching and
jerking movements, are common following ketamine administration. When these movements
have been extensive, they have been mistaken for
seizure activity. However, ketamine has been
shown to have anticonvulsive properties and has
been used without complication in patients with
seizure problems. Ketamine also causes an increase in intracranial pressure by producing
cerebral vasodilation and increased perfusion
pressure. It is therefore relatively contraindicated
in patients with serious head trauma, hydrocephalus, and intracranial lesions. In addition, ataxia
and dizziness may persist for up to 4 hours
following ketamine administration. Therefore, rapid
independent ambulation is not recommended
following the use of ketamine.
Emergence phenomenon
Psychic reactions associated with ketamine may
result from the disconnection of external stimuli
from higher cerebral function. The incidence of
psychic phenomena with ketamine has been
reported to be between 0% and 50% in adults
and 0% and 10% in children.17 These experiences
have been described as detachment, floating or
bodily suspension, out-of-body experiences, and
strange thoughts or dreams. Factors that may
place patients at increased risk for these reactions
may include age greater than 10 years, female
gender, rapid intravenous administration of high
doses, and personality disorders. Not all psychic
responses to ketamine are unpleasant. Blankstein
and Anderson,18 in a comparison of low-dose
ketamine with methohexital in adults undergoing
oral surgery, found that ketamine was not associated with unpleasant dreaming, whereas some
subjects given methohexital experienced horrifying dreams. The psychotomimetic effects of

ketamine seem to be readily attenuated with the
adjunctive administration of benzodiazepines or
propofol. As discussed later, dexmedetomidine
may be useful in preventing or attenuating emergence delirium associated with ketamine.
A possible cause for concern with ketamine use
is nausea and vomiting. Although reports indicate
that the incidence of nausea and vomiting may
be from 0% to 43%, the incidence in pediatric
patients is less than 10%. When vomiting does
occur, it usually occurs late in the recovery phase
or when the patient becomes ambulatory. At this
juncture, the patient is alert and the airway may
be cleared without assistance.
Clinical use
Sedation with ketamine may be induced either
intravenously or intramuscularly. An intramuscular
induction dose of 2 to 4 mg/kg of ketamine is useful in gaining behavioral control of unruly pediatric
patients or patients with special needs. Intraoperative maintenance may be achieved with either a
continuous infusion at a rate of 50 mg/kg/min, or
by intermittent boluses of 5 to 20 mg as needed.
Midazolam may be administered in 1-mg increments to provide background sedation and to
control possible psychotomimetic effects. An antisialogogue may be needed to control the excessive secretions sometimes seen with ketamine.
Ketamine may be combined with propofol in a
single syringe (ketofol) and administered by continuous infusion for procedural sedation. Kramer
and colleagues19 compared the combination
of propofol-remifentanil with propofol-ketamine
for third molar surgery. The concentration of
10 mg/mL of propofol and 2.5 mg/mL of ketamine
produced sedation hemodynamic stability, and
respiratory stability that was comparable with
the concentration of 10 mg/mL of propofol and
5 mg/mL of remifentanil. However, the combination
of propofol and ketamine was associated with
longer emergence and recovery times, which
could limit its usefulness in third molar surgery.

Dexmedetomidine
Dexmedetomidine is a highly selective a2-agonist
similar to clonidine but with a greater affinity for
the a2-receptor. Alpha2-receptors are located in
the peripheral vasculature and produce vasoconstriction when activated. However, their primary
site of action in the sympathetic nervous system
is at the adrenergic neural endplate where they
initiate a negative feedback loop that modulates
the release of norepinephrine. This feedback
results in an attenuation of the sympathetic stress
response. Alpha2-receptors are also found in the
CNS in the locus ceruleus and the spinal column.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Pharmacology of Medications in Oral Surgery
Activation of these areas results in anxiolysis,
sedation, and analgesia.
Stimulation of a2-receptors in the dorsal horn of
the spinal column inhibits nociceptive neurons
and reduces the release of substance P. Although
there is some evidence for supraspinal and peripheral sites of action for dexmedetomidine, it is
thought that the spinal mechanism produces
most of the drug’s analgesic action.20,21 Dexmedetomidine is rapidly redistributed, with an elimination
half-life of 6 minutes and an elimination half-life of
2 hours.
Cardiovascular effects
Dexmedetomidine produces a significant reduction in heart rate, systemic vascular resistance,
and systolic blood pressure.22 These effects aid
in modulating the stress response, which may be
particularly useful in patients with systemic hypertension and/or myocardial ischemia who could
respond adversely to surgical stressors. Dexmedetomidine promotes stability and may protect
against radical fluctuations in cardiovascular
parameters intraoperatively.
Dexmedetomidine loses its a2-receptor selectivity as the dose is increased by intravenous bolus
injection or rapid infusion. This loss results in an
initial increase in blood pressure and concomitant
decrease in heart rate, which normalizes within
15 minutes, followed by a further reduction in
blood pressure.20,22
Respiratory effects
A major advantage of dexmedetomidine compared with other anesthetic drugs is its minimal
effect on the respiratory system. In patients with
poor airways, obesity, and/or limited range of
motion, dexmedetomidine produces excellent
sedation without compromising the airway or
depressing respiration.
Clinical use
Dexmedetomidine is a useful adjunct for procedural sedation, either via bolus injection or continuous infusion. A bolus injection of 0.25 mg/kg to
0.5 mg/kg given slowly in divided doses, to avoid
a transient increase in blood pressure, produces a
noticeable quieting or mellowing effect without
respiratory depression. As an alternative, sedation
may be induced by a continuous infusion of dexmedetomidine, 1 mg/kg over 10 minutes, followed by a
maintenance infusion of 0.2 mg/kg/h to 0.7 mg/kg/h.
Dexmedetomidine has been shown to decrease
the requirement for the coadministration of propofol, opioids, and benzodiazepines.23,24
Emergence delirium can be a significant problem following outpatient anesthesia because of
the potential for serious disruption of the office,

damage to instruments and equipment, and injury
to the patient or office personnel. Delirium is
described as a disturbance of consciousness,
characterized by the acute onset of impaired
cognitive functioning, significantly impairing a
patient’s ability to process and store information.
Pediatric patients, patients with special needs,
and the elderly are particularly prone to emergence delirium following anesthesia, especially
when benzodiazepines and potent inhalational
agents are used. Patients who develop delirium
are more likely to have poor outcomes when hospitalized, including increased length of stay, the
need for subsequent institutionalization, and
higher mortality. Cognitive impairment has been
reported to negatively affect key outcome indicators such as removal from the ventilator, pneumonia, and total length of hospital stay.25
Dexmedetomidine has been studied to assess
its efficacy in reducing the occurrence of emergence delirium. Riker and colleagues26 compared
the efficacy of dexmedetomidine with midazolam
for the maintenance of mechanically ventilated
patients, and also examined the incidence of
delirium in those patients. Although the two drugs
produced comparable levels of sedation, dexmedetomidine significantly reduced the incidence of
delirium, 54% versus 75% for midazolam. In addition, the duration of delirium was reduced by 48%
in the dexmedetomidine group. Patients treated
with dexmedetomidine had a statistically significant greater ability to communicate and to cooperate than those treated with midazolam.
Pandharipande and colleagues27 compared the
efficacy and incidence of delirium of dexmedetomidine and lorazepam in mechanically ventilated
intensive care patients. Lorazepam has been
recommended by the Society of Critical Care
Medicine for the sustained sedation of mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit.
However, it has been proposed that the GABA
effects of lorazepam and other benzodiazepines
may alter levels of potentially deliriogenic neurotransmitters, with negative consequences.
Compared with the lorazepam group, the dexmedetomidine group had a lower prevalence of coma
(63% vs 92%), fewer days with delirium (3 vs
7 days), and the 12-month time to death was
363 days versus 188 days.
Emergence delirium is also common in children
recovering from deep sedation and general anesthesia. Shukry and colleagues28 studied 2 groups
of children between the ages of 1 and 10 years
receiving general anesthesia with sevoflurane.
One study group received an infusion of dexmedetomidine and the other received saline. The dexmedetomidine group had an emergence delirium

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

449

450

Giovannitti
incidence of 26% versus 60% for the saline group.
Another study investigated the incidence of emergence delirium in children receiving general anesthesia for a nonsurgical procedure.29 One group
received an infusion of dexmedetomidine after
induction of anesthesia and the other group
received a placebo infusion. The children who
received dexmedetomidine had a 4.8% incidence
of delirium compared with 47.6% for the placebo
group.
Dexmedetomidine may be used either prophylactically or emergently for the prevention or control
of emergence delirium. In patients who are deemed
at risk for emergence delirium, 0.25 mg/kg of
dexmedetomidine may be slowly injected intravenously during the maintenance phase of anesthesia. Should emergence delirium occur, another
0.25 mg/kg may be administered. In cases in which
prophylaxis has not been administered, emergence
delirium may be controlled with the intravenous
administration of 0.5 mg/kg of dexmedetomidine.

SUMMARY
TIVA is a technique whose time has come because
of the advent of ultra–short-acting drugs and
computerized infusion technology. Patients may
be sedated to any desired level, maintained there
for indefinite periods, and recovered to near baseline within minutes, which gives the operator
extreme, moment-to-moment control of the anesthetic and improves patient outcomes. Future
trends in TIVA may include patient-controlled
sedation, whereby patients sedate themselves
with an infusion device similar to those used for
postoperative analgesia. It seems that, of the
drugs currently available, a remifentanil/propofol
combination would be suitable. The future may
also bring titration of sedatives to target blood
levels, leading to more precise dosing and greater
efficiency.
This article provides an overview of historical
and current sedative agents available to the
dentist anesthetist. The discussion is intended to
provide the surgeon with rational choices for sedation and the individualization of drug selection for
each patient.

REFERENCES
1. Halford F. A critique of intravenous anaesthesia in
war surgery. Anesthesiology 1943;4:67–9.
2. ASA statement on sodium thiopental’s removal
from the market. 2011. Available at: www.asahq.org/
For-the-Public-and-Media/Press-Room/ASA-News/
ASA-State. Accessed July 19, 2012.

3. MacDonald RL, Olsen RW. GABAA receptor channels. Annu Rev Neurosci 1994;17:569–602.
4. Vasile B, Rasulo F, Candiani A, et al. The pathophysiology of propofol infusion syndrome: a simple name
for a complex syndrome. Intensive Care Med 2003;
29:1417–25.
5. Diprivan [package insert]. Schaumberg (IL): APP
Pharmaceuticals; 2011.
6. Harper DL, Castells MC. Anaphylaxis during the perioperative period. Anesth Analg 2003;97:1381–95.
7. Lizaso Bacaicoa MT, Acero Sainz S, Alvarez
Puebla MJ, et al. Cutaneous response to Diprivan
(propofol) and intralipid in patients with leguminous
and egg allergy. Rev Esp Alergol Immunol Clin
1998;13:153–7.
8. Delitala G, Trainer PJ, Oliva O, et al. Opioid peptide
and alpha-adrenoreceptor pathways in the regulation of the pituitary-adrenal axis in man.
J Endocrinol 1994;141:163–8.
9. Ng HP, Chen FG, Yeoung SM, et al. Effect of remifentanil compared with fentanyl on intraocular pressure
after succinylcholine and tracheal intubation. Br
J Anaesth 2000;85:785–7.
10. Ko MC, Naughton NN. An experimental itch model in
monkeys: characterization of intrathecal morphineinduced scratching and nociception. Anesthesiology 2000;92:795–805.
11. Kranke P, Eberhart LH, Roewer N, et al. Pharmacological treatment of postoperative shivering: a quantitative systematic review of randomized controlled
trials. Anesth Analg 2002;94:453–60.
12. Dionne RA, Yagiela JA, Moore PA, et al. Comparing
efficacy and safety of four intravenous sedation
regimens in dental outpatients. J Am Dent Assoc
2001;132:740–51.
13. Moore PA. Selecting drugs for the pregnant dental
patient. J Am Dent Assoc 1998;129:1281–6.
14. Backman JT, Olkkola KT, Neuvonen PJ. Rifampin
drastically reduces plasma concentrations and
effects of oral midazolam. Clin Pharmacol Ther
1996;59:7–13.
15. Villikka K, Kivisto KT, Backman JT, et al. Triazolam is
ineffective in patients taking rifampin. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1997;61:8–14.
16. Giovannitti JA. Dental anesthesia and pediatric
dentistry. Anesth Prog 1995;42:95–9.
17. Green SM, Johnson NE. Ketamine sedation for
pediatric procedures: part 2, review and implications. Ann Emerg Med 1990;19:1033–46.
18. Blankstein KC, Anderson JA. A double blind comparison of low dose intravenous ketamine and
methohexital in adults. J Oral Maxillofac Surg
1991;49:468–75.
19. Kramer KJ, Ganzberg S, Prior S, et al. Comparison
of propofol-remifentanil versus propofol-ketamine
deep sedation for third molar surgery. Anesth Prog
2012;59:107–17.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Pharmacology of Medications in Oral Surgery
20. Virtanen R, Savola JM, Saano V, et al. Characterization of the selectivity, specificity and potency of
medetomidine as an a2-adrenoceptor agonist. Eur
J Pharmacol 1988;150:9–14.
21. Jaakola ML, Salonen M, Lehtinen R, et al. The analgesic action of dexmedetomidine-a novel alpha2adrenoceptor agonist in healthy volunteers. Pain
1991;46:281–5.
22. Dyck JB, Maze M, Haack C, et al. The pharmacokinetics and hemodynamic effects of intravenous
and intramuscular dexmedetomidine hydrochloride
in adult human volunteers. Anesthesiology 1993;
78:813–20.
23. Aantaa RE, Kanto JH, Scheinin M, et al. Dexmedetomidine premedication for minor gynecologic
surgery. Anesth Analg 1990;70:407–13.
24. Aantaa RE, Kanto JH, Scheinin M, et al. Dexmedetomidine, an alpha2-adrenoceptor agonist, reduces
anesthetic requirements for patients undergoing
minor gynecologic surgery. Anesthesiology 1990;
73:230–5.

25. Ely EW, Shintani A, Truman B, et al. Delirium as a
predictor of mortality in mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit. JAMA 2004;291:
1753–62.
26. Riker RR, Shehabi Y, Bokesch PM, et al. Dexmedetomidine vs. midazolam for sedation of critically
ill patients: a randomized trial. JAMA 2009;301:
489–99.
27. Pandharipande PP, Pun BT, Herr DL, et al. Effect of
sedation with dexmedetomidine vs. lorazepam on
acute brain dysfunction in mechanically ventilated
patients: the MENDS randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2007;298:2644–53.
28. Shukry M, Mathison C, Kalarickel P, et al. Does
dexmedetomidine prevent emergence delirium in
children after sevoflurane-based general anesthesia? Paediatr Anaesth 2005;15:1098–104.
29. Isik B, Arslan M, Tunga AD, et al. Dexmedetomidine
decreases emergence agitation in pediatric patients
after sevoflurane anesthesia without surgery.
Paediatr Anaesth 2006;16:748–53.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
March 02, 2019. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

451

