Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Placenta
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/placenta

Abstracts for the International Federation of Placenta
Associations Meeting 2012

Abstract Outline - IFPA 2012

Keynote Plenary Sessions
NIH Lecture
Senior Award Lecture
New Investigator Oral Session 1
New Investigator Oral Session 2
Invited Speaker Presentations
Trophoblast Research Award
Than Award Lecture
Poster session 1
Poster session 2

(K1, K2)
(NIH)
(SA1)
(N1 – N6)
(N7 – N12)
(S1 – S8)
(TR)
(THAN)
(P1.0 – P1.125)
(P2.1 – P2.117)

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.placenta.2012.06.016

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A2

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

K1

K2

EXPLORATORY PROCESS OF PLACENTATION FROM HUMAN
BEINGS TO OCEAN LIVING SPECIES

PLACENTAL TROPHOBLAST AS EPITHELIUM: A USEFUL
CLASSIFICATION?

Hiroaki Soma
Saitama Medical School, Saitama, Japan

Richard Boyd
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

1. Placentation process from prehistoric placoderms to sharks and
rays.
The placenta with appearance of million years ago has shown a signiﬁcant
evolutionary development that gave use to the vast majority of mammals
alive until today from human to Ocean living species. In 2005, Australian
scientist Prof. John A. Long has detected fossils of umbilical cord belong to
pelvic structures in the ancient ﬁsh, Materpiscis in 375-million ago, but no
placental fossil was found. It was, therefore, supposed that placoderms had
a remarkable advanced reproduction since long time ago. Sharks and Chondrichthyan are generally considered to be primitive ﬁshes. At this chance,
astonished placentations of Hammerhead shark and Manta ray are presented.

2. Placentation process from giant sea cow to dugong and
manatee.
In 1980, a gigantic skeleton of Takikawa Sea Cow (dugongid sirenia) with
15 millions years ago was detected on riverside of Takikawa, Hokkaido,
Japan. This giant sirenia was ancestor of vanished Steller’s sea cow in the
Behring Sea and dugongs as well as manatee in the warm ocean. They feed
upon aquatic vegetation. Their sea cows group was related to Proboscidea
(elephant) from 45 millions year, even though their living environments
are quite different. They share herbivorous diet and a long gestational
period approximately 1.5 to 2 years. In this presentation, their placentation
presented zonary endothelial types was compared.

It is more than 60 years since electron microscopy revealed the polarized
nature of the trophoblast. At that time there was increasing consideration
of the placenta as playing a remarkable role acting as the” lungs”, the
“intestine”, the “kidney” and the “liver” of the fetus. Thus functional work
in the following decades sought to establish the basis of transplacental
transport involving for example primary, secondary and tertiary active
transport, transporters (symporters and antiporters) and channels. These
studies emphasised the polarized distribution of these membrane
proteins. More recently renewed interest in the intracellular cell biology of
epithelia, speciﬁcally of signalling compartments has begun to be applied
to the trophoblast. This work feeds into both the genomic revolution and to
epigenetic control, as well as to the immunobiology of materno fetal
interaction. For fetal well-being, for successful neonatal outcome and
for the long term health of the individual in adult life the placenta is
recognized increasingly as having an important role. I will argue that the
epithelial properties of the trophoblast are helpful in integrating this. One
speciﬁc example relates to the role of the placenta in embryonic brain
development (McKay 2011 Nature 472 298) where the release into the
fetus in a polarized manner of serotonin synthesized from the amino acid
tryptophan, taken up from the maternal circulation, has been shown to be
critical. Rather remarkably tryptophan has other central roles in placental
biology, again involving polarized vectorial transport and these will be
reviewed.

3. A comparative study of placental pathology between great apes
(Chimpanzee and Orang-utan), in contrast with placenta of
small monkey (Goeldi’s monkey, Callimico) in South America.
A purpose of this study was not only considered comparison of placental
pathology between human and great apes, but also was expected whether
gestational trophoblastic tumor may occur in great apes.

4. Placental pathology in Himalayan mountain people.
The vast majority of Nepal population lives in small rural settlements,
where a chronic shortage of essential health care system and low socioeconomic status in addition to rough high altitude, result in a lack of
prenatal care for pregnant women, thereby causing high perinatal
mortality and neonatal mortality rates in Nepal. This study has started
with pathological examination of 1,000 Himalayan placentas obtained in
Nepal and Tibet since 1977 and the results were compared with Japanese
placentas since 1990. As a characteristic of histological ﬁndings of the
placental villi in Himalayan groups, the incidence of villous chorangiosis
and chorangioma was high. Such histogenesis was clariﬁed with
ultrastructural observation.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

NIH

SA1

EMBRYONIC AND TROPHOBLAST STEM CELL MODELS OF
EMBRYO IMPLANTATION AND PLACENTAL DEVELOPMENT

REPRODUCTIVE IMMUNOLOGY IN PERSPECTIVE

Thaddeus Golos, Maria Giakoumopoulos, Mark Garthwaite
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
The human embryo is not a feasible experimental system for the detailed
study of implantation and early placentation, so surrogate systems have
been sought for investigating the determination of the trophectoderm
lineage, and its differentiation into trophoblasts of the early implantation
site and subsequently the deﬁnitive placenta. Trophoblast stem cells (TSC)
have been identiﬁed in several species, and employed most extensively in
the mouse in studies of the transcriptional regulation of trophoblast
differentiation and placental morphogenesis. TSC have been reported but
less extensively studied in porcine and rhesus, and recently in cells from
the human chorionic plate. An alternative to the use of embryos for
studying early placental development was revealed by work with human
embryonic stem cells (hESC), demonstrating either BMP2/4-stimulated
trophoblast differentiation, or spontaneous formation from embryoid
bodies. These cells display a trophoblastic transcriptome, as well as
a placental protein and steroid hormone secretory proﬁle, and invasive
and chemotactic behavior resembling human placental trophoblasts.
Two-dimensional and three-dimensional paradigms and other modiﬁcations of the culture environment, including oxygen tension and extracellular matrix, impact on trophoblast differentiation. Induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSC) also resemble hESC in their capacity to form trophoblasts
in BMP-stimulated and embryoid body paradigms. Although the precise
placental counterpart of the hESC-derived trophoblast remains unclear,
hESC-derived trophoblasts remain an intriguing platform for modeling
early implantation. Supported by NIH grants P01 HD38843 and R01
RR021876.

A3

J. Hunt
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, USA
Involvement of the maternal and fetal immune systems in the events of
pregnancy was generally overlooked by reproductionists until the midtwentieth century. At that time, Billingham and Beer noted that viabilities of transplants to rat uteri were extended during pregnancy; Tachi et al
reported that phagocytic macrophages populated mammalian uteri; Faulk
discovered a lack of rejection-mediating Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLA)
on some extraembryonic fetal tissues. From those original observations
and many others of note, the ﬁeld of reproductive immunology was born.
Now, more than half a century later, it is well understood that with the
initiation of pregnancy, mammalian uteri host an altered variety of interactive immune cells generating an immunosuppressive environment
believed to protect the implanted embryo from normal maternal immune
responses. Scientists agree that both maternal and fetal factors drive the
formation and maintenance of this unique natural environment. In our
laboratory we have studied uteroplacental macrophages, have investigated products of both immune cells and placental trophoblast cells for
regulatory molecules, and have uncovered unusual biochemical and
functional properties of placental HLA. Our ﬁndings indicate that particularly in humans, multiple pathways contribute to the safety of the
“foreign” fetus as it proceeds to parturition. Funded by the National
Institutes of Health, USA.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A4

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

N1

N2

DOES MALARIA AFFECT PLACENTAL DEVELOPMENT?
EVIDENCE FROM AN IN VITRO MODEL

INVESTIGATION FOR TUMORIGENESIS AND NEW MOLECULAR
TARGET OF CHORIOCARCINOMA BY INDUCED
CHORIOCARCINOMA CELL-1

Alexandra Umbers1,2, Danielle Stanisic2,3, Francesca Baiwog2, Ivo
Mueller4,5, Peter Siba2, Christopher King6, James Beeson7, Stephen
Rogerson1
1
University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 2Papua New Guinea Institute
of Medical Research, Goroka, Papua New Guinea, 3Grifﬁth University, Gold
Coast, Queensland, Australia, 4Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia, 5CRESIB, Barcelona, Spain, 6Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA, 7McFarlane Burnet Institute, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia
Objectives: In malaria endemic areas such as Papua New Guinea,
Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) malaria during pregnancy is a leading
preventable cause of fetal growth restriction (FGR). The underlying pathogenic mechanisms are poorly characterized, but may include impaired
placental development. We performed a pilot study to determine if in
vitro methods commonly used to assess placental biology could be used
to investigate whether maternal malaria infection affects trophoblast
invasion.
Methods: We tested serum from PNG women with Pf in peripheral blood
at their ﬁrst antenatal presentation (between 16 and 22 weeks gestation)
for the ability to inhibit ﬁrst trimester EVT-cell line invasion and viability
in vitro. Because invasion is enhanced by a number of hormones and
chemokines, and is inhibited by pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, many of
which are dysregulated in malaria in pregnancy, we further compared
concentrations of these factors in blood between malaria-infected and
uninfected pregnancies.
Results: Compared to controls, serum from malaria-infected women
signiﬁcantly reduced trophoblast invasion (P ¼ .02). This phenomenon
could not be explained by changes in trophoblast viability (P ¼ .4). Serum
collected from malaria-infected women had signiﬁcantly lower levels of
invasion promoting factors (Insulin like growth factors -1 and -2, P ¼ .0001, P
¼ .01 respectively, and IL-8 P ¼ 0.02) and higher levels of invasion inhibitory
modulators (human chorionic gonadotropin P ¼ .002, IL-10 P ¼ .01).
Conclusion: Although malaria-induced elevated pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines and reduced fetal growth hormones have been reported at
delivery, this study is the ﬁrst to describe altered levels of such factors early
in pregnancy. These inﬂammatory and hormonal disturbances in early
pregnancy may impair placental development. This is a signiﬁcant
advancement in our understanding of the temporal and pathophysiological events that may contribute to FGR due to Pf malaria in pregnancy.

Yusuke Kobayashi1, Kouji Banno1, Eiichiro Tominaga1, Takatsune Shimizu2,
Kenta Masuda1,2, Arisa Ueki1,2, Kousuke Tsuji1, Iori Kisu1, Hiroyuki
Nomura1, Osamu Nagano2, Nobuyuki Susumu1, Hideyuki Saya2, Daisuke
Aoki1
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Keio
University, Tokyo, Japan, 2Division of Gene Regulation, Institute for
Advanced Medical Research, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo,
Japan
Objectives: The molecular mechanisms underlying choriocarcinoma
tumorigenesis remain uncharacterized, however, appropriate choriocarcinoma models have not been developed yet. In this study, to overcome
above the background, we established induced choriocarcinoma cell-1
(iC3-1) and performed microarray and bioinformatics analysis using iC3-1.
Methods: iC3-1 cells were generated from HTR8/SVneo retrovirally
transduced with activated HRASV12. Microarray analysis and quantitative
RT-PCR between iC3-1 and HTR8/SVneo were performed, in addition,
bioinformatics analysis that compared the gene proﬁling of iC3-1 and
normal placental tissue on NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) was also
performed. The expression of SOX3, HAS2, CD44, CD68, CD163 and S100
which were focused on by the analyses was examined on clinical samples
by immunohistochemistry. To investigate SOX3 contribution to choriocarcinoma tumorigenesis, we evaluated SOX3 tumorigenic activity by its
expression knockdown with SOX3-speciﬁc short-hairpin RNA (shSOX3).
Results: Inoculated iC3-1 cells rapidly generated lethal tumors in nude
mice. The tumors contained the two typical trophoblast cell types,
syncytiotrophoblasts and cytotrophoblasts, histologically similar to
human choriocarcinoma. Gene expression study revealed that matrix
metalloproteinase-family genes and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
related genes were signiﬁcantly upregulated in iC3-1 cells. SOX3
downregulation by shSOX3 markedly attenuated the tumorigenic activity
of iC3-1 cells and inoculated nude mice. HAS2, CD44, CD68, CD163 and S100
were signiﬁcantly upregulated in iC3-1 compared to control cell by
microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR. Immunohistochemistry
revealed clinical samples showed immunoreactivity with these molecules.
Conclusion: Our established choriocarcinoma model represents a novel
tool for studying the tumorigenesis and treatment of choriocarcinoma.
Among of focused molecules in this study, SOX3 upregulation might be
involved in choriocarcinoma tumorigenic activity. S100 and CD44 were
reported that the former expressed several cancers and the latter involved
proliferation and metastasis of cancer, especially the marker of cancer
stem cell. Thus, these molecules were suggested to be new molecular
target in choriocarcinoma.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

N3

N4

HYPOXIA MAINTAINS TROPHOBLAST PROGENITOR
MARKERS FOLLOWING BMP4 TREATMENT
OF HUMAN EMBRYONIC STEM CELLS

CD107AD CYTOTOXIC NK-CELLS IN DECIDUA AND
CIRCULATION IN 3rd TRIMESTER PREGNANCY

Anna Wakeland1, Yingchun Li1, Matteo Moretto-Zita1, Kristopher Nazor2,
Louise Laurent1, Mana Parast1
1
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA, 2The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA
Objective: Early placental growth and development occurs almost
exclusively under low oxygen tension. Under such conditions, trophoblast
differentiation is inhibited and proliferation is enhanced. Our lab previously identiﬁed p63, a member of the p53 gene family, as a speciﬁc marker
of proliferative cytotrophoblast (CTB) in the human placenta. We have also
determined that p63 expression is enhanced during BMP4-induced
trophoblast differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESC). Here
we determined the effects of oxygen tension on trophoblast induction of
hESC in order to optimize conditions for maintenance of the trophoblast
progenitor state.
Methods: Trophoblast induction of hESC was performed as previously
described: feeder-free hESC (WA09) were plated on Geltrex and treated for
8 days with 10 ng/mL BMP4, in the presence of feeder-conditioned
medium (FCM). Differentiation was performed under both normoxia
(20% O2) or physiologic hypoxia (5% O2); the latter was done using an
XVIVO hypoxic workstation (Biospherix), which allows cells to be
manipulated under desired oxygen tension. Cells and supernatants were
collected at days 0, 2, 4, 6, and 8; total cellular RNA was extracted using the
miRvana kit (Ambion). Whole genome proﬁling was performed using the
Illumina BeadStation; qPCR was used to conﬁrm a subset of the array
results. Secreted hCGbeta was measured using an ELISA kit (Calbiotech).
Results: Microarray analysis showed that hypoxia did not inhibit
trophoblast induction of hESC; rather, it did inhibit terminal trophoblast
differentiation. qPCR conﬁrmed that under hypoxia, expression of
trophoblast progenitor markers, including p63 and CDX2, was enhanced,
while expression of differentiation markers GCM1, syncytin A, CGA, and
CGB was decreased. Secreted hCGbeta was also reduced under hypoxia.
Conclusion: Low oxygen tension inhibits terminal trophoblast differentiation of BMP4-treated hESC. Further characterization of BMP4-treated
hESC under hypoxia may help determine a molecular signature for the
human “trophoblast progenitor” state.

A5

Guro Mørk Johnsen1,3, Kjetil Taskén2,3, Anne Cathrine Staff1,4
Department of Obstetrics and Department of Gynecology, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2NCMM - Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway,
Nordic EMBL Partnership, The University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 3The
Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, The University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 4The
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
1

Objective: NK-cells have a specialized role in the uterus during pregnancy
where they are involved in regulating maternal immunological responses
against fetal cells, and thereby the process of placentation. Our objective
was to examine the distribution of subpopulations of circulating and
uterine NK-cells from healthy and preeclamptic third-trimester pregnancies, and to quantify their cytotoxic activity by analyzing CD107a expression. CD107a is located in the membrane of intra-cellular lytic granules;
upon activation of NK-cells and T-cells these granules are exocytosed and
the CD107a molecules are temporarily located on the cell surface where
they can be detected by ﬂow cytometry.
Methods: Blood and decidua samples were obtained from women with
healthy pregnancies or preeclampsia undergoing cesarean section in the
third trimester. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from
freshly collected blood using gradient density centrifugation. Decidual
tissue was harvested by suction from the placental bed after delivery of the
placenta, and mononuclear cells were isolated by enzymatic tissue
digestion followed by gradient density centrifugation. Cells were ﬁxed and
stained with ﬂuorochrome-coupled antibodies towards CD3, CD4, CD8,
CD56, CD16 and CD107a and subsequently analyzed by ﬂow cytometry on
a BD FACSCantoÔII.
Results: We observed a higher percentage of CD3-CD56þ NK-cells in
decidua compared to blood from third-trimester pregnancies (22.5% vs.
8.3%, P¼0.002). Furthermore, we found that decidua has signiﬁcantly more
CD56brightCD16- cells than blood (61.7% vs. 2.84%, P¼ < 0.0001), and that
the expression of CD107a on these cells was lower in decidua (5.6% vs.
15.0%, P¼0.0099), resulting in a ratio of CD107a/CD56 expression on
CD56brightCD16- cells that is 35-fold higher in blood than in decidua
(P<0.001).
Conclusion: Our results suggest that CD56brightCD16- NK-cells in decidua
have lower cytotoxic activity than in the circulation, as shown by surface
expression of CD107aþ.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A6

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

N5

N6

VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS FROM SPIRAL ARTERIOLES
PRODUCE CHEMOKINES WHICH REGULATE EXTRAVILLOUS
TROPHOBLAST CELL MIGRATION

THERAPEUTIC EFFECT OF MATERNAL HYDROGEN WATER
ADMINISTRATION IN A RAT MODEL OF FETAL BRAIN DAMAGE

Simon Chau, Padma Murthi, May Wong, Shaun Brennecke, Rosemary
Keogh
University of Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology and
Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre, Royal
Women’s Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia
Objectives: Early in human pregnancy, extravillous trophoblast (EVT)
invades and remodel uterine spiral arterioles feeding the placenta, facilitating increased blood ﬂow to the placenta and fetus. The study objectives
were to isolate and characterize uterine spiral arteriole vascular smooth
muscle cells (SPAR VSMC) and investigate how factors produced by these
cells regulate EVT migration.
Methods: SPAR VSMC was isolated from uterine spiral arteriole segments
dissected from myometrial biopsies collected with informed consent
following Caesarean section from uncomplicated pregnancies (n¼6).
Expression of VSMC markers by SPAR VSMC was determined using
immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting. Medium collected from
SPAR VSMC cultures following 24 hours of serum starvation was analyzed
for chemokines using a Multi-Analyte ELISArray (SABiosciences) which
gives a positive signal if the chemokine in the sample falls in the range
1-1000pg/ml. Migration assays were performed using the xCELLigence
system (Roche).
Results: SPAR VSMC expressed the VSMC markers a-smooth muscle actin,
tropomyosin and caldesmon and were negative for the ﬁbroblast marker
CD90. SPAR VSMC conditioned medium signiﬁcantly increased EVT
migration 420%77% over 48 hrs compared to control medium (p<0.05,
Mann Whitney U Test, n¼4), indicating the production of chemotactic
factors by the SPAR VSMC. Analysis of the conditioned medium for 12
chemokines demonstrated the presence of (in descending order of relative
abundance); CXCL8, CCL2, CCL4, CXCL10, CCL22, CXCL11, CXCL9, CCL11,
CCL5, CXCL1 and CCL3. CCL17 was not detected. Our previous work has
demonstrated that EVT migration is stimulated by CXCL8, CCL2, CCL11,
CCL5 and CXCL1 over the range 1-100 ng/ml. Now we show that CCL3,
CCL4 and CCL22 over the range 1-40ng/ml all increase EVT migration by an
average of 140-670% (n¼3).
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that SPAR VSMC produce chemokines which may contribute to EVT migration. The ability to isolate and
study SPAR VSMC increases understanding of vessel-EVT interactions in
early pregnancy.

Yukio Mano, Satoshi Matsukawa, Kaoru Niimi, Yuriko Watanabe, Tomoko
Nakano, Sawako Fujiwara, Hiroyuki Tsuda, Seiji Sumigama, Tomomi
Kotani, Fumitaka Kikkawa
Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan
Objectives: Recently, Several studies have shown that molecular hydrogen
plays the role of antioxidant. This study was designed to investigate the
protective effect of hydrogen-saturated water (HW) using a rat model of
Ischemia-Reperfusion (IR) induced fetal brain damage.
Methods: To provoke oxidative stress in fetus, IR operation, in which
a bilateral utero-ovarian artery of pregnant Wistar rat was occluded for 30
min and then released, was performed on day 16 of pregnancy. The rats
were assigned to three groups: sham group, they underwent laparotomy
that IR procedure was omitted; IR group, in which IR operation was
performed; IRþHW group, they were given HW from two days before IR
operation to delivery. After vaginal delivery, we estimated neonatal
growth and collected brain at postnatal day 7. Brain damage was evaluated
by hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemistry of oxidative
stress marker was performed. To assess the hippocampal damage, Morris
water maze test was carried out. Hydrogen concentration in placenta,
amniotic ﬂuid and fetal brain was measured by a gas chromatography.
Results: Neonatal growth was signiﬁcantly retarded in IR group compared
with sham group. HW restored neonatal growth. The degeneration of
hippocampal pyramidal cells was observed in IR group. In IRþHW group,
the degenerated cells were signiﬁcantly reduced compared with IR group.
Immunohistochemistry showed that 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine and
4-hydroxy-2-nonenal were strongly positive in IR group and were
attenuated by HW. In Morris water maze test, reference memory was
signiﬁcantly impaired in IR group and improved by maternal administration of HW. Gas chromatography showed that maternal administration of
HW signiﬁcantly increased hydrogen concentration in placenta, whereas
no difference was observed in fetal brain and amniotic ﬂuid.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that maternal administration of HW has
a potential beneﬁt for cerebral palsy and might be a novel intra-uterine
prevention and therapy.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

N7

N8

THROMBIN IS A PATHOGENIC FACTOR IN PRETERM LABOR AND
PRETERM RUPTURE OF MEMBRANES

DETERMINATION OF A MECHANISTIC LINK BETWEEN
ABNORMAL MATERNAL INFLAMMATION AND THE
DEVELOPMENT OF INTRAUTERINE GROWTH RESTRICTION
AND PRE-ECLAMPSIA

Haruta Mogami1, Patrick W. Keller2, Haolin Shi2, R. Ann Word2
Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan, 2University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA
1

Objectives: Intrauterine or vaginal bleeding is a risk factor for preterm
birth and premature rupture of membranes (PROM). Thrombin is
a trypsin-like serine protease that plays a major role in hemostasis and in
degradation of the extracellular matrix. Here, we investigated the effects of
thrombin on (i) pregnancy duration in vivo and (ii) matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and prostaglandin (PG) synthesis in epithelial and
mesenchymal cells of human amnion.
Methods: Thrombin and MMP-1 activities were quantiﬁed using FRET
methodology. Primary human amnion epithelial and mesenchymal cells
were used to quantify MMP1, 2, 9, and COX2 mRNA levels by qPCR.
Gelatinase activity was assessed by gelatin zymography. PGE2 levels in
conditioned media were assayed by ELISA. To determine the effects of
thrombin in vivo, precisely timed pregnant mice (d17) were injected in
the interface between fetal membranes and uterus with either thrombin
(4U/pup) or PBS.
Results: Thrombin activity was increased signiﬁcantly in amnion from
preterm (n¼9) compared with term (n¼6) deliveries (2.1-fold, P<0.05).
Treatment of amnion mesenchymal cells with thrombin (2U/ml, 48h)
resulted in increased MMP1 mRNA (6-fold) and enzyme activity (from 8
to 148ng/mg protein, P<0.01). Thrombin also increased active MMP-2
(1.5-fold), MMP9 (8-fold), and pro-MMP-9 (2-fold) in these cells. Using
immunohistochemistry, PAR-1, a major thrombin receptor, was localized to
human decidua and amnion mesenchymal cells. Moreover, thrombin
increased COX2 mRNA (16-fold, P<0.01) and PGE2 (from 44 to 449ng/mg
protein, P<0.05). In vivo, as expected, PBS-injected control mice delivered
at term 48h after injection and all pups survived (n¼11). In contrast, all
thrombin-injected mice delivered preterm between 17-22h after injection
and all premature pups died (n¼16).
Conclusion: Thrombin results in increased MMP-1, MMP-9, and PG
biosynthesis in amnion mesenchymal cells, not epithelial cells. Collectively, the data indicate that thrombin plays a pivotal role in the
pathogenesis of preterm labor and PROM.

A7

Tiziana Cotechini, Maria Komisarenko, Shannyn Macdonald-Goodfellow,
Michael A. Adams, Charles H. Graham
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada
Objectives: Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and pre-eclampsia (PE)
are often associated with abnormal maternal inﬂammation. Evidence links
IUGR/PE with deﬁcient trophoblast-mediated remodeling of uterine spiral
arterioles leading to restricted placental perfusion. Decreased placental
nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability may also play a role. Deﬁcient placental
perfusion can induce IUGR, whereas placental damage can cause the
release of factors that induce hypertension, proteinuria and glomerular
endotheliosis (GEN). We hypothesize that abnormal inﬂammation is key to
the pathophysiology of IUGR/PE.
Methods: We developed a model of inﬂammation whereby pregnant
Wistar rats are injected with low-dose lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on
gestational days (GD) 13.5-16.5. The effects of inﬂammation on pregnancy
complications were determined primarily on GD 17.5. We employed
(a) Doppler ultrasound to assess altered hemodynamics; (b) immunohistochemistry to localize trophoblasts, macrophages and nitrotyrosine;
(c) light and transmission electron microscopy to assess LPS-induced GEN;
(d) protein:creatinine ratio to assess proteinuria, and (e) radiotelemetry to
monitor alterations in blood pressure.
Results: LPS administration resulted in IUGR and increased maternal
arterial pressure. This effect of LPS was associated with GEN, proteinuria,
increased levels of TNF, decreased trophoblast invasion, impaired spiral
arteriole remodeling, deﬁcient utero-placental perfusion and increased
macrophage inﬁltration in the decidua and mesometrial triangle.
Increased nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity was suggestive of decreased NO
bioavailability in utero-placental units of LPS-treated dams. Transdermal
administration of an NO mimetic (nitroglycerin, 25 mg/hr) prevented the
nitrotyrosine accumulation as well as the LPS-induced IUGR, proteinuria
and GEN. Inhibition of TNF activity (etanercept, 10 mg/kg) prevented IUGR
and the associated trophoblast, hemodynamic and renal alterations.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings demonstrate that maternal inﬂammation can
lead to severe pregnancy complications via a mechanism dependent on
increased levels of TNF and decreased NO bioavailability. Our ﬁndings
provide a rationale for the use of anti-inﬂammatory agents and NO
mimetics in the treatment and/or prevention of pregnancy complications.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A8

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

N9

N10

SIRT6 REGULATES KEY TERMINAL EFFECTOR PATHWAYS OF
HUMAN LABOUR: POSSIBLE THERAPEUTIC TARGET FOR THE
MANAGEMENT OF INFECTION-INDUCED PRETERM BIRTH

PLACENTAL ADAPTATION TO MATERNAL OBESITY:
ROLE OF OXIDATIVE STRESS IN ACTIVATION OF
AUTOPHAGY AND CELL DEATH

Ratana Lim, Gillian Barker, Martha Lappas
University of Melbourne, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia

SribalasubashiniI Muralimanoharan, Alina Maloyan, James Mele, Leslie
Myatt
UTHSCSA, San Antonio, USA

Objectives: Infection-induced preterm birth is a major determinant of
neonatal mortality and morbidity. The mechanisms that regulate preterm
birth are unknown; however, the pro-inﬂammatory transcription factor
NF-kB and its target genes (cytokines; cyclooxygenase (COX)-2; extracellular matrix remodelling enzymes) play an important role in the terminal
processes of labour and delivery, including rupture of fetal membranes. In
non-gestational tissues, sirtuin (SIRT) 6 exerts anti-inﬂammatory actions
by inhibiting NF-kB and its target genes. The aims of this study were to
determine the effect of (1) human preterm labour on SIRT6 expression in
human gestational tissue; and (2) SIRT6 inhibition and overexpression on
pro-labour mediators in primary amnion cells.
Methods: SIRT6 mRNA and protein expression was determined, by qRTPCR and Western blotting, on combined fetal membranes from women
grouped as (1) preterm no labour: Caesarean section with no labour and
(2) preterm labour: after spontaneous labour and normal vaginal delivery.
In human primary amnion cells, SIRT6 knockdown was achieved using
siRNA and SIRT6 overexpression was achieved using a cDNA clone. After
treatment with IL-1b, pro-labour mediators were assayed.
Results: SIRT6 mRNA and nuclear protein expression was signiﬁcantly
lower in fetal membranes from women after preterm labour compared to
preterm not in labour. In primary amnion cells, SIRT6 inhibition by siRNA
increased IL-1b-induced cytokine expression (IL-6, IL-8, TNF-a), COX-2
mRNA and subsequent PGF2a release, MMP-9 mRNA expression and
release, and NF-kB p65 mRNA expression. Conversely, SIRT6 overexpression decreased IL-1b-induced cytokine, prostaglandin, MMP-9 and
NF-kB p65 expression.
Conclusion: Spontaneous preterm birth is associated with decreased
SIRT6 expression. Functional studies demonstrate an important role for
SIRT6 in the regulation of cytokines, prostaglandins and MMPs associated
with preterm birth. These actions of SIRT6 appear to be mediated via its
effects on NF-kB. Thus, SIRT6 could provide a candidate therapeutic target
for the management of infection-induced preterm birth.

Obesity during pregnancy is associated with maternal complications, poor
perinatal outcome and developmental programming effects on the
offspring. Our previous studies show that with increasing maternal BMI
there is an overall increase in placental oxidative stress. We hypothesized
that the chronic low-grade inﬂammation of obesity leads to oxidative
stress and pathological dysfunction in the placenta.
Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate oxidative stress and cell
death in villous tissue of placenta from lean, overweight and obese
women.
Methods: As there is marked sexual dimorphism in placental physiology,
we evaluated only placentae from a male fetus. Placental villous tissues
were collected from lean (LN: BMI 19-24.9), overweight (OW: BMI 25-29.9)
and obese (OB: BMI 30-45) women (n¼5 each group) after C-section at
term, prior to labor. We employed Western blotting to measure autophagy
markers and placental cryosections to measure ROS by Dichloroﬂuorescein
(DCF) staining and apoptosis by TUNEL assay. H2O2 levels were measured
in placental homogenates by Amplex red assay.
Results: We detected a signiﬁcant increase in accumulation of the
autophagy markers, ATG3 and ATG7 in OB compared to LN and OW groups.
This was accompanied by a reduction in p62, a marker for accumulation of
misfolded proteins, and of LC3 cleavage associated with formation of
autophagosomes. However cathepsin B and LAMP2, markers for completion of autophagy, did not differ across the groups, suggesting defective
autophagy. ROS production (DCF staining) was signiﬁcantly elevated in
OW and OB group. H2O2 production was 1.8 fold higher in OB villous tissue
homogenate compared to LN and OW. TUNEL staining showed 6-fold
increase in the number of apoptotic nuclei in both OW and OB compared
to LN.
Conclusion: Our data suggests that the obese maternal environment is
associated with defective autophagy in the placenta resulting in excessive
production of ROS triggering a cascade of pathological events including cell
death.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

N11

N12

SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST EXPRESSION OF THE MINOR
HISTOCOMPATIBILITY ANTIGEN HA1 IS INCREASED IN
PLACENTAS FROM PREECLAMPTIC WOMEN

ROLE OF ADENOSINE A2A RECEPTOR AND NITRIC OXIDEDEPENDENT SIGNALING PATHWAY IN FETAL ENDOTHELIUM
MIGRATION AND PROLIFERATION DURING EARLY AND
LATE-ONSET PRE-ECLAMPSIA

Caitlin Linscheid, Timothy Fields, Margaret Petroff
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA
Objectives: Cohorts of maternal T cells reactive to fetal minor histocompatibility antigens, including the autosomally encoded antigen, HA1,
expand during pregnancy. We have shown that at HA1 and at least ﬁve
additional minor antigens are expressed in human placental trophoblast
cells. Because the placenta may be a source of fetal antigens to which
mothers are sensitized, we sought to determine how placental HA1 is
regulated. Speciﬁcally, we asked whether HA1 expression is altered in
preeclampsia, and whether its expression in trophoblast cells is regulated
by oxygen.
Methods: HA1 mRNA and protein expression levels were evaluated in
placentas of preeclamptic and healthy matched control women
(n¼8/group). Real time RT-PCR was used to determine relative expression
of HA1 mRNA, and semi-quantitative immunohistochemical analysis was
used to evaluate HA1 protein expression in the syncytiotrophoblast. Lastly,
puriﬁed term cytotrophoblast cells were cultured in 2%, 8% and 21% oxygen
for 24 hours, and HA1 mRNA levels were determined using real time
RT-PCR.
Results: When compared to normal controls, HA1 mRNA expression in
preeclamptic placentas was increased by 3.3-fold (P¼0.015). HA1 protein
expression was increased in the syncytiotrophoblast of preeclamptic
placentas as compared to their matched controls (mean H-score, 35.4 v. 3.0
in preeclamptic and control placentas, respectively; P¼0.03). HA1 mRNA
was increased in puriﬁed term cytotrophoblast cells cultured under 2%
oxygen and 8% oxygen as compared to 21% oxygen.
Conclusion: Collectively, these data reveal a novel mechanism by which
the maternal immune system may be exposed to enhanced levels of
fetal antigens. Increased expression of HA1 in the placenta, together with
increased placental deportation of syncytiotrophoblast-derived microvesicles, during preeclampsia may increase fetal antigenic load in the
mother. This could potentially alter the maternal adaptive immune
response to the fetus in the existing and/or subsequent pregnancies.
Supported by NIH grants R01 HD045611 and P20 RR016475.

A9

Jesenia Acurio1, Andrea Escudero1, Cristian Celis1, Patricio Bertoglia1,2,
Carlos Escudero0
1
Vascular Physiology Laboratory, Department of Basic Sciences,
Universidad del Bio Bio, Chillan, Bio Bio Region, Chile, 2Herminda Martin
Clinical Hospital, Chillan, Bio Bio Region, Chile
Background: Stimulation of A2A adenosine receptor (A2AAR) is associated
with either increasing endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) expression
and eNOS activation (i.e., tyrosine 1177 phosphorylation); a mechanism
linked to pro or anti-proliferate effects depending of the cell type.
Feto-placental endothelial cells from pre-eclampsia exhibit high adenosine
extracellular levels but low nitric oxide (NO) formation. Aim: Investigate
whether NO signaling pathway is involved in fetal endothelium proliferation and migration induced by A2AAR stimulation in early and late-onset
pre-eclampsia.
Methods: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were isolated
from normal (n¼15), late-onset pre-eclampsia (n¼12) and early-onset
pre-eclampsia (n¼12). Adenosine A2A expression was evaluated by
immunocytochemistry and western blot. Cell proliferation was analyzed
using MTS-assay and by direct cell count using haemocytometer, in
absence or presence of non-selective adenosine receptor agonist (NECA
10mM), A2AAR selective agonist (CGS-21680, 100nM), and/or the antagonist
ZM-241385 (0-100mM) during 24 hours. In parallel, counting of the cells
crossing the “wounds” pre-made in dishes of conﬂuent cells, as well as
transwell assays were used for assessing cell migration. Besides, NOS
inhibitor (L-NAME, 100 mM) was used in co-incubation by either adenosine
receptor agonists. Nitrite concentration in the culture medium was
measured by Griess reaction and protein nitration was assessed by western
blot in cells exposed to CGS-21680 (30min).
Results: Early-onset pre-eclampsia was associated to low (w70%) A2AAR
protein abundance compared with normal or late-onset pre-eclampsia.
Basally, HUVEC from early-onset showed a low (w42%), whereas lateonset exhibited high (w1.5-fold) proliferation and migration compared
to normal pregnancy. Proliferation and migration of HUVEC was increased
by CGS-21680 or NECA (w1.5 and 2-fold, respectively) in the three
analyzed groups compared with respective control without agonists.
Stimulatory effect of CGS-21680 was blocked by ZM-241385 in normal
pregnancies (Ki, 25nM) and late-onset (Ki 50nM) but not in early-onset
(Ki ambiguous). On the other hand, eNOS protein abundance and
eNOS-tyrosine 1177 phosphorylation was reduced (w50%) in early-onset
pre-eclampsia compared to late-onset or normal pregnancy. In turn, cells
from late-onset pre-eclampsia exhibited high (w2-fold) eNOS phosphorylation compared with normal pregnancy. CGS-21680 (30 min) increased
(w2-fold) the eNOS phosphorylation, nitrite and nitrotyrosine formation
in normal cells, a phenomena blocked by ZM-241385. In early-onset, but
not in late-onset pre-eclampsia, CGS-21680 generates a signiﬁcant
increase in nitrotyrosine formation. L-NAME partially blocked (w25%) the
stimulatory effect of CGS-21680 in migration and proliferation of HUVEC
observed in late-onset and normal pregnancy.
Conclusion: A2AAR exhibit a pro-angiogenic effect mediated at least
partially by NO formation in normal and late-onset pre-eclampsia.
Reduced proliferation and migration of HUVEC present in early-onset
pre-eclampsia seems related with reduced expression and activation of
A2AAR and eNOS.
Supported by FONDECYT 1100684, Conicyt Anillo ACT73.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A10

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

S1

S2

FETAL ENDOTHELIAL PROGENITOR CELLS IN THE PLACENTA
AND PREGNANT UTERUS

HUMAN UTERINE STEM/PROGENITOR CELLS: IMPLICATIONS
FOR UTERINE PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY

Ian Crocker, Peter Sipos
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

Tetsuo Maruyama
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Keio
University, Tokyo, Japan

Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are circulating bone marrow-derived
cells involved in fetal and adult neovascularisation, angiogenesis and
vascular repair. At least two subtypes are described, Circulating Angiogenic
Cells (CACs) and Endothelial Colony Forming Cells (ECFCs). Their importance in pre-eclampsia is debated. However, here we present work
on fetal EPCs, more speciﬁcally ECFCs, and their (i) impact on placental
vascularisation, (ii) irregularities in fetal growth restriction (FGR) and
(iii) transmigration to the pregnant uterus.

(i) Differential measures of EPCs in arterial and venous human
cord blood strongly implied placental sequestration. In
conﬁrmation, culture-expanded ECFCs showed full vascular
incorporation following ex vivo perfusion into human
chorionic placental arteries, whilst similar in vivo transplanted
cells, introduced into the mouse fetal circulation, preferentially homed to placental vessels and demonstrated angiogenic/vasculogenic phenomena.
(ii) Compared to uncomplicated pregnancies, human cord-blood
EPCs were reduced in FGR pregnancies and their culturederived counterparts (ECFCs) showed (i) diminished proliferative capacity, (ii) ineffective tube-formation and (iii) underresponsiveness to hypoxia. These disparities likely underpin
their observed inability to generated blood vessels de novo, in
artiﬁcial tissue blocks transplanted into immune-deﬁcient
mice.
(iii) Following eGFP and native mouse matings, fetal endotheliallike cells were indentiﬁed in murine uterine vessels. In vivo,
fetal injected human ECFCs were tracked to the mouse uterine
endothelium and again conﬁrmed to incorporate. In human
studies, fetal cells were observed in the human uterine
microvasculature and, through SRY quantitation, estimated to
occupy 10% of the total vascular endothelium

The human uterus primarily consists of the endometrium and the outer
smooth muscle layer termed the myometrium. The uterus exhibits the
unique and remarkable regenerative capacity responsible for cyclical
regeneration and remodeling throughout a woman’s reproductive life. The
endometrium, in particular the functionalis layer, must regenerate,
differentiate and regress with each menstrual cycle under hormonal
control. These morphological and functional features of human endometrium can be reproduced in murine models in which severely immunodeﬁcient mice are xenotransplanted with dispersed human endometrial
cells under the kidney capsule followed by hormonal treatment. The
myometrium possesses the similar plasticity of the endometrium. This is
demonstrated by multiple cycles of pregnancy-induced enlargement and
regression after parturition. Regeneration and remodeling in the uterus are
likely achieved through endometrial and myometrial stem cell systems.
Indeed, we and other investigators have identiﬁed, isolated and characterized these putative stem/progenitor in humans and rodents, providing
a new insight into their possible roles in the physiology and pathophysiology of the human uterus. Furthermore, these stem/progenitor cells
might be clinically applicable as a novel source of biological material for
the reconstruction of not only the human uterus but also other organs.

These studies conﬁrm that human ECFCs contribute to de novo endothelium and vessel formation in the human placenta and suggest their
extensive integration into the remodelled pregnant uterus. Intrinsic
attenuations in their number and/or function could offer explanation for
abnormal placentation of FGR. These anomalies, if persistent, could also
hold life-long consequences for the vascular health of affected mothers
and babies.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A11

S3

S4

TRANSPORT ACROSS THE PLACENTA: OF MICE AND WOMAN.
A REVIEW

ADIPONECTIN: THE MISSING LINK BETWEEN MATERNAL
ADIPOSITY, PLACENTAL TRANSPORT AND FETAL GROWTH?

Colin Sibley, Mark Dilworth
Maternal and Fetal Health Research Centre, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK

Thomas Jansson
University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio, San Antonio, TX,
USA

Placental dysfunction is a major cause of pre-eclampsia (PE) and fetal
growth restriction (FGR) and is therefore a target for potential treatments.
However, there are no such treatments currently in clinical practice. Here
we review work designed to characterise and develop genetic mouse
models of human PE and FGR, which could then be used to test new drugs.
This has involved (1) comparing and contrasting normal placental function
between mouse and woman; (2) characterizing genetic mouse models;
(3) testing candidate drugs in the mice.

OBJECTIVES, METHODS, RESULTS, CONCLUSION
Fetal growth is positively correlated to maternal adiposity, however the
underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. Adiponectin is the most
abundant protein secreted by white adipose tissue and has wellestablished insulin-sensitizing effects. Pregnant women who are obese
or have gestational diabetes typically have low circulating levels of
adiponectin, which is correlated to increased fetal growth. Lean women, on
the other hand, have high circulating levels of adiponectin. As a result,
maternal serum adiponectin is inversely correlated to fetal growth across
the full range of birth weights, suggesting that maternal adiponectin may
limit fetal growth. Adiponectin abolishes insulin stimulated amino acid
uptake in cultured human primary trophoblast cells by modulating insulin
receptor substrate phosphorylation. Furthermore, chronic administration
of adiponectin to pregnant mice inhibits placental insulin and mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling, down regulates the activity and
expression of key placental nutrient transporters and decreases fetal
growth. These ﬁndings have led to the working model that adiponectin
binds to the adiponectin receptor-2 on the trophoblast cell and activates
p38MAPK and PPAR-a, which inhibits the insulin/IGF-I signaling pathway
resulting in down-regulation of placental nutrient transporters and
reduced fetal growth. We further hypothesize that accumulation of fatty
acid metabolites represent a link between PPARa and the insulin-signaling
pathway. These observations suggest that adiponectin causes insulin
resistance in the human placenta, in contrast to the well-established
insulin-sensitizing effect in skeletal muscle and liver. Regulation of
placental function by adiponectin constitutes a novel physiological
mechanism by which the endocrine functions of maternal adipose tissue
inﬂuence fetal growth. These ﬁndings may help us better understand the
factors determining birth weight in normal pregnancies and in pregnancy
complications associated with altered maternal adiponectin levels such as
obesity and gestational diabetes.
Supported by NIH HD065007 and HD058032.

(1) Myometrial and chorionic plate arteries from women behave
similarly to uterine and umbilical arteries from the mouse in
the wire myograph. The mouse placenta shows similar, though
slightly higher, permeability to inert hydrophilic solutes than
the human placenta. Similar transporter systems exist in both
mouse and human placentas: for example the system A amino
acid transporter is present on the microvillous plasma
membrane of both. These data show sufﬁcient similarities to
support a programme of work characterizing and using genetic
mouse models to test potential therapies.
(2) We have focused on the placental speciﬁc Igf-2 knockout (P0)
mouse. Placental weight is reduced in the P0 mice and 97% of
these fetuses fall below the 5th centile of wild-type (WT) fetal
weights; the P0 placentas have altered system A amino acid
transporter activity and lower permeability to hydrophilic
solutes. Uterine artery reactivity in the myograph is similar
between P0 and WT vessels.
(3) We have begun testing whether the NO potentiating drug
sildenaﬁl citrate (S.C) improves placental and fetal growth in
the P0 mice. Preliminary data suggest S.C increases placental
and, to a lesser degree, fetal weight.
In conclusion, placental function in mouse and woman is similar, and data
suggest that mouse genetic models of placental dysfunction might aid the
development of therapies for PE and FGR.
Supported by the Medical Research Council (UK).

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A12

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

S5

S6

MODELLING PLACENTAL AMINO ACID TRANSFER: FROM LAB
TO LAPTOP AND BACK AGAIN

THE DANGEROUS PLACENTA AND PRE-ECLAMPSIA, A REVIEW

Rohan Lewis
Univerisity of Southampton, Southampton, UK
The mechanisms underlying placental amino acid transfer are complex but
can now be explained in principle. However, this understanding in principle does not mean that the function of the system as a whole can be
predicted. Computational modelling of amino acid transfer may provide an
approach which represents the complex interactions between different
transporters and allows functional predictions.
Amino acid uptake by the apical microvillous membrane of the placental
syncytiotrophoblast requires interaction between accumulative transporters and amino acid exchangers. On the basal membrane amino acid
exchangers and facilitated transporters are required to mediate efﬂux of
amino acids. Transporter activity is dependent on amino acid gradients
across membranes. These gradients are determined by: individual transporters, interactions between different transporters, maternal and fetal
blood ﬂow, mixing of blood within the different compartments and
placental metabolism. These factors create a complex interplay between
the different transport systems and between transporters and their local
environment. This complexity means that while the principles of the
system are known, how the system functions in practice cannot be
intuitively understood.
Developing an integrated understanding of placental amino acid transport
is essential in order to understand amino acid transfer in both normal and
pathological pregnancies. The ﬁrst aim of our approach is to use simple
computational models to make testable predictions about placental
function. Testing these predictions experimentally will demonstrate the
strengths and weaknesses of the model which can be developed with
increasing complexity and retested in an iterative fashion. In this way we
hope to develop a functional model of amino acid transfer and focus
attention on the most important determinants of amino acid transfer.
Once a model is established it will allow exploration of the factors which
result in impaired amino acid transfer and development of strategies to
optimise placental transfer in intrauterine growth restricted pregnancies.

Christopher Redman, Dionne Tannetta, Jen Southcombe, Bec Dragovic,
Chris Gardiner, Gavin Collett, Ian Sargent
Oxford University, Oxford, UK
Normal, third trimester pregnancy and pre-eclampsia are both characterised by systemic vascular inﬂammation, which is more intense in
pre-eclampsia. The danger hypothesis identiﬁes inﬂammation as a generic
and polymorphic response to loss of cellular equilibrium, secondary to
various stimuli that include infection, oxidative stress, endoplasmic
reticulum stress, trauma and so on. Together these stimuli constitute
‘danger’. The evidence indicates that the presence of even a normal
placenta is sufﬁciently destabilising to be ‘dangerous’ to the mother.
The two stage model of pre-eclampsia predicts that deﬁcient remodelling
of maternal spiral arteries causes dysfunctional arterial ﬂow that oxidatively and hydrodynamically damages the placenta, so causing not only the
maternal syndrome as a danger response but also fetal growth restriction
(FGR). However FGR is not a feature of late onset disease (after 34 weeks)
implying that placental function is not impaired in this subtype. This has
led to the concept of maternal and placental pre-eclampsia, the former
being secondary to the interaction between a normal placenta and an
abnormal maternal circulation already predisposed to the vascular
inﬂammation that characterises pre-eclampsia. Mixed presentations,
which combine both aspects, are likely to lead to the most severe
presentations.
Circulating trophoblast derived molecules are differently affected by
maternal and placental pre-eclampsia as predicted by this concept and
potentially might discriminate placental from maternal disease.
The pre-eclampsia placenta releases a wide range of danger molecules.
This suggests that placental pre-eclampsia is unlikely to be a response to
a single factor. Some of these molecules are carried by trophoblast-derived
extracellular vesicles. Together they will probably comprise a mix derived
from both regulated and dysregulated placental responses to its own
‘danger’.
Future research will be facilitated by recognition of these pre-eclampsia
subtypes and abandoning the expectation that a single factor causes
placental pre-eclampsia.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A13

S7

S8

PREECLAMPSIA, PLACENTAL ACUTE ATHEROSIS AND FUTURE
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE: IS THERE A LINK?

HOW DOES THE MATERNAL IMMUNE SYSTEM OR AUTOPHAGY
SYSTEM CONTRIBUTE TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF
PREECLAMPSIA?

Anne Cathrine Staff1,2
1
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Preeclampsia is a potentially lethal pregnancy complication for women
and offspring. Sufferers have a long-term augmented risk of cardiovascular
disease and premature death and may have risk factors in common with
older persons developing cardiovascular disease, which are unmasked by
the “stress” of pregnancy. It is also possible that a new risk factor might
occur de novo during preeclampsia, and predispose for future cardiovascular disease.
In preeclampsia, lipid deposition in the walls of the spiral arteries of the
uteroplacental circulation regularly occurs. These lesions resemble early
stages of atherosclerosis (acute atherosis) and are thought to regress after
delivery. The mechanisms that contribute to acute atherosis in
preeclampsia are largely unknown, but are related to the impaired vascular
remodeling of the spiral arteries in the ﬁrst half of pregnancy. An intriguing
and unexplained feature is that acute atherosis seems to be associated
with defective remodelling of the spiral arteries that is a consequence of
poor placentation. Our data show that spiral artery lipid deposition may
also occur in normal pregnancies, which suggests that it may not be
conﬁned exclusively to maladapted spiral arteries.
The review will include some recent data of elevated circulating
biomarkers that may be linked to cardiovascular disease, which we have
found to be present in preeclampsia, and also several years afterwards. Our
preliminary ﬁndings showing that women with a polymorphism of the
RGS2 (regulator of G protein signalling) gene (C1114G, RGS2 1114G allele)
are at augmented risk for preeclampsia and placental acute atherosis. RGS2
is a member of a large family of regulators of G protein signalling and is
involved in the control of blood pressure. Reduced expression of RGS2 has
been associated with hypertension.
Further understanding of the process underlying spiral artery atherosis
in the months of pregnancy may help cast light on development of
cardiovascular disease later in life.

Shigeru Saito, Akitoshi Nakashima, Arihiro Shiozaki, Tomoko Shima
University of Toyama, Toyama-shi, Toyama-ken, Japan
Two stage disorder theory is well accepted for the pathophysiology of
preeclampsia. Stage 1 is poor placentation at early stage of pregnancy and
the second stage is associated with exaggerated endothelial activation and
a generalized hyperinﬂammatory state. Impaired angiogenesis plays
important roles in stage 2, but cause of poor placentation remains largely
unknown. Jauniaux’s placental oxygen curve shows oxygen concentration
in placenta is very low (w2% O2). Here, we show that autophagy, which is
an intracellular bulk degradation system under stress condition, was
observed in extravillous trophoblast (EVT) under hypoxia in vitro and
in vivo clinical samples. Interestingly, invasion and vascular remodeling
under hypoxia were signiﬁcantly reduced in autophagy-deﬁcient EVT that
is established by stably transfecting Atg 4B mutant expression vector. We
found soluble endoglin (sEng), which increased in sera of preeclamptic
cases, suppressed EVT invasion by inhibition of autophagy. High dose of
sEng (more than 250 ng/ml) inhibited vascular construction by EVT and
HUVEC, meanwhile 100ng/ml of sEng inhibited the replacement of HUVEC
by EVT (vascular remodeling). These ﬁndings were not observed in
autophagy-deﬁcient EVT. We have checked the expression of p62 in EVT
which is selectively degraded by autophagy. We found the accumulated
p62 in EVT preeclamptic placental biopsy samples showing impaired
autophagy.
Epidemiological studies and immunological studies show immune system
play some roles for the pathophysiology of preeclampsia. We have shown
that granulysin produced by uterine NK cells induced apoptosis of EVT in
miscarriage. Serum granulysin is a marker for Th1 type immunity and Th1
type immunity is observed in preeclampsia. We have found that granulysin
positive cells were accumulated in preeclamptic placental biopsy samples
and intracellular staining of granulysin was observed in EVT of
preeclamptic cases but not in normal cases, suggesting that maternal T
cells and NK cells attack EVT causing the death of EVT.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A14

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

TR

Than Award Lecture

TR AWARD LECTURE - SIZE IS EVERYTHING: THE SEARCH FOR
A 3-D MORPHOMETRIC MARKER TO PREDICT FETAL GROWTH
RESTRICTION

REGULATING THE REGULATORS: MICRORNA CONTROL OF
PLACENTAL GROWTH FACTOR SIGNALLING

Sally Collins1,2, Gordon Stevenson1, Alison Noble1, Lawrence Impey2
1
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, 2The John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK
Objectives: Fetal growth restriction (FGR) is a major cause of perinatal
morbidity & mortality, even in term babies. Early placental volume
measured with a semi-automated technique has been shown to predict
FGR. Placental morphology measured in 2-D in the second trimester may
also be correlated with FGR. We sought to explore a novel 3-D method for
deﬁning placental shape in utero and investigate if any subsequent
morphometric indices correlated with FGR.
Methods: We prospectively recruited women with a singleton pregnancy
and a BMI of 35. A 3D ultrasound scan was performed using a Voluson E8
(GE Medical systems) between 11 and 13þ6 weeks’ gestation. The
placental volume, total placental surface area and placental basal plate
area were calculated using our previously validated technique. From these
we generated dimensionless indices including sphericity (j), standardise
placental volume (sPlaV) and standardised functional area (sFA) using
Buckingham p theorem. FGR was deﬁned as <10th customised birthweight centile. Regression analysis examined which morphometric &
biochemical measures were independent predictors of FGR. Potential
screening performance was assessed with ROC curve analysis. The data
were analysed using SPSS (SPSS inc).
Results: Morphometric and biochemical data were collected for 143
women, 20 had FGR babies. Only sPlaV, sFA, PAPP-A and NT were signiﬁcantly correlated to birth weight (p<0.001). Regression demonstrated all
dimensionless indices were inter-dependent co-factors. ROC curves
showed no advantage for using sFA over the simpler sPlaV. The generated
model predicted normotensive, term, FGR with 83% sensitivity for 20%
false positive rate.
Conclusion: The dimensionless index of placental volume (sPlaV) is
signiﬁcantly correlated with birth weight. The placental morphometric
indices are not independent of volume at this early gestation. A model can
be produced combining sPlaV with PAPP-A and NT to predict FGR. This
simple process may aid in the development of a screening test for FGR

Karen Forbes
Maternal & Fetal Health Research Centre, Institute of Human Development,
University of Manchester, UK
Fetal growth restriction (FGR) and fetal overgrowth (macrosomia) are
associated with altered placental growth and development. Using an
explant model of human ﬁrst trimester placenta, we have previously
demonstrated that growth factors such as the insulin-like growth factors,
are important regulators of placental growth. Most growth factors exert
their actions by activating receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) to initiate
a serious of downstream phosphorylation events within the PI3K and
MAPK pathways, thus the ability of the placenta to modulate expression of
components of these pathways is important for normal pregnancy
outcome. Endogenously, gene expression can be regulated by microRNAs
(miRs); the placenta contains high levels of these molecules thus miRs
have the potential to regulate placental gene expression. Using a systems
biology based approach, we have now afﬁrmed a role for individual miRs
in regulating both growth factor signalling and placental growth; these
will be discussed in this lecture.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.0

P1.1

CLINICAL RELEVANT HISTOLOGICAL PATTERNS OF
CHORIOAMNIONITIS BY AMNIOTIC FLUID INFECTION
NOSOLOGY COMMITTEE SYSTEM

DOES “BETA” EXIST IN TWIN PREGNANCIES? COMPARISONS
OF MONOCHORIONIC AND DICHORIONIC TWINS, AND
CORRELATIONS WITH CHANGE IN PLACENTAL METABOLIC
EFFICIENCY

Yuichiro Sato, Yujiro Asada, Kousuke Marutsuka, Naoshi Yamada, Hiroshi
Sameshima, Tsuyomu Ikenoue
University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan
Objectives: Prenatal infections are important aspects of placental
pathology. The histological pattern of chorioamnionitis (CAM) by Blanc has
been widely used, this scheme has not include necrotizing CAM or fetal
inﬂammatory response. Redline et al. proposed the new histological
diagnostic framework of CAM, and showed reproducibility among of
pathologists (amniotic ﬂuid infection nosology committee). To assess the
clinical relevant histological patterns, we examined the new histological
diagnostic framework of CAM.
Methods: We reviewed placentas with 493 singleton births (the mean
gestational age: 33 weeks). In this system, maternal stage 1 was deﬁned as
acute subchorionitis or chorionitis, stage 2 was acute CAM, and stage 3 was
necrotizing CAM. Fetal stage was deﬁned as chorionic vasculitis or
umbilical phlevitis, stage 2 was umbilical vasculitis, and stage 3 was
necrotizing funisitis. Grade 1 was deﬁned as mild to moderate, grade 2 was
severe.
Results: Among of 493 cases, placental examination revealed 112 cases
(22%) with CAM. Maternal and fetal inﬂammatory responses were associated with maternal and infant CRP levels, infant death, sepsis, brain
diseases, and lung diseases. Multiple logistic analysis showed maternal
inﬂammatory response was associated with sepsis and brain damage, and
fetal inﬂammatory response was contributed with infant death and brain
disease.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that new histological diagnostic framework
of CAM is useful for the information in amniotic ﬂuid infection and
neonatal prognosis.

A15

Nora Kiryankova2,1, Carolyn Salaﬁa2,1, Michael Yampolsky3, Elza Matrova2,
Oleksandr Shlahkter1, Samantha VanHorn1,2, Shevon Haywood4, M Park2
1
Placental Analytics, LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 2New York Methodist
Hospital, Brooklyn, NY, USA, 3University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada,
4
Institute for Basic Research, Staten Island, New York, USA
Objectives: We have shown that beta, calculated as ln(PW)/ln(BW), is
a measure of placental functional efﬁciency equal to 0.75 across a range of
populations. Do monochorionic (MO) twins, with twins sharing a single
placenta, and dichorionic (DI) twins (with each twin with a unique
placental mass) also show this relationship? If so, what factors perturb
beta?
Methods: 32 MO and 137 DI twins were delivered at New York Methodist
Hospital between 2009 and 2011 and had available birth weights (BW),
placental weights (PW), gestational age (GA) data and cord insertion site.
BW Discordance was calculated as larger weight-smaller weight/larger
weight. Beta was calculated as above, and compared between twin types,
cord insertions, and BW discordance.
Results: Mean beta for MO and DI were 0.777þ0.027 and 0.780þ0.032
(NS). Mean GA for MO and DI were 248.4þ23.6 and 249.2þ19.8 (NS), with
mean BW of larger and smaller twins in MO and DI 2311þ535g,
2042þ534g and 2472þ581g, 2192þ523g (NS), respectively. Mean discordance in MO and DI twins were 12þ8% and 6þ7% (NS). Beta varied with
BW discordance only in MO twins (MO r¼0.53, p¼0.002, DI r¼0.001,
p¼0.99) independent of GA. Controlling for cord insertion (velamentous,
marginal or normal) strengthened the beta - BW discordance relationship
(r¼0.65, p¼0.001).
Conclusions: MO and DI twins show allometric scaling similar to singletons. Increases in beta indicate reduced placental functional efﬁciency.
Discordant BW is related to greater beta (less efﬁcient placenta) only in MO
twins, regardless of GA. The very early events that result in MO twinning
can lead to permanent abnormal placental development that may include
marginal/velamentous cord insertions and the later development of BW
discordance.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A16

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.2

P1.3

CHARACTERIZATION OF PLACENTAL GROWTH AS
A BIOMARKER OF AUTISM/ASD RISK

ANALYSIS OF PLACENTAL SHAPE AND CORD INSERTION IN
A RELATED COHORT OF FAMILIAL AUTISM, THE EARLI COHORT

Carolyn Salaﬁa1, Dawn Misra2, Jean Golding3, Craig Platt4, Sue Ring1
1
Placental Analytics, LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 2Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA, 3School of Social and Community
Medicine University of Bristol, Bristol, UK, 4University Hospital’s Bristol
NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, UK

Carolyn Salaﬁa1, Dawn Misra2, Jean Golding3, Craig Platt4, Michael
Yampolsky5, Oleksandr Shlakhter5, Sue Ring1
1
Placental Analytics, LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 2Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA, 3School of Social and Community
Medicine University of Bristol, Bristol, UK, 4University Hospital’s Bristol
NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, UK, 5University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Goal: To determine the correlation between placental growth patterns
with diagnosis of autism/ASD as compared to a control group.
Methods: A nested case control study of the Avon Longitudinal Study of
Parents and Children (ALSPAC) included archived placentas for 52 children
(7 female, 45 male) in the cohort with diagnosed with autism/ASD and for
a control group (n¼161) with no neurodevelopmental diagnoses, at a 3:1
ratio to cases.
Results:

1. Placental weight was signiﬁcantly reduced (w100 g) in female
autism cases compared to controls, also after adjusting for
gestational age (p<0.05). This was not the result of outliers in
either distribution. No such effects were seen in males.
2. The inﬂuence of gestational age on placental weight differed
by sex in regression models to predict placental weight by
case/control status and gestational age. Gestational age had
a strong effect on placental weight for males (p<0.05) but not
for females; we did not test the interaction due to the small
sample.
3. The smaller placental dimension did not signiﬁcantly differ
between autism cases and controls in either gender. However,
the difference among females (-1.41 cm) was two-fold that of
males (-018 cm).
4. b, a marker of placental functional efﬁciency and placental
fractal structure, did not differ between boys with autism/ASD
(0.755þ0.0239) and controls (0.753þ0.0202). b differed
between girls with and without autism/ASD (0.733þ0.0354 v.
0.760þ0.0161, p¼0.001). b differed by gestational age only in
boys (point estimate of effect¼-0.002, p¼0.009 v. females with
p¼0.53). The association of altered b in girls with autism/ASD
persisted after adjustment for gestational age (estimate of
effect of autism/ASD “case” status¼0.03, p¼0.01).
Conclusions: Gestational age effects on autism/ASD risk may be marked
by altered placental fractality and altered b. We hypothesize that placental
growth patterns are altered in autism/ASD in gender speciﬁc fashions
which may provide insights into the mechanisms of and differences
between autism/ASD frequency and phenotype in females compared to
males.

Goals: To determine the correlation between placental growth patterns of
high risk sibling from families with an older child diagnosed with autism/
ASD as compared to a large and well-studied birth cohort.
Methods: 53 well preserved digital photographs of the fetal surface and 51
digital photographs of the sliced placental disk from EARLI high autism risk
newborns been processed identically to the University of North Carolina
Pregnancy, Infection and Nutrition Study (UNC PIN), extensively analysed
by the PI and are treated here as the reference group for the EARLI
placentas. Fourier analysis of the shape and cord displacement (calculated
as the displacement from the center of the area of the chorionic plate
shape) of the two groups were compared using non-parametric correlations with p<0.05 signiﬁcant.
Results: Umbilical cord marginality deﬁned either by the ﬁrst Fourier
coefﬁcient or more directly as the cord displacement differs signiﬁcantly
between autism/ASD cases and the UNC PIN birth cohort. Cord displacement is greater in placentas from siblings of autism/ASD cases; cords are
closer to the placental chorionic disk margin. The disks of autism/ASD case
siblings are less round, more irregular in perimeter, with signiﬁcantly
larger values of sigma and symmetric difference and measures of placental
roundness (each p<0.0001). Disk thickness in autism/ASD siblings was
also signiﬁcantly less (p<0.0001) as was the linear deviation from the
average width (a measure of thickness variability, [2]). This ﬁnding was
independent on the length of the slice (diameter of placental disk).
Conclusion: These data show early promise of being able to use placental
measures to contribute to our understanding of likely pathways of disordered neurodevelopment in the heterogeneous spectrum of autism/ASD.

Mean  sd

Fourier 1
Displacement
Displacement/
Diameter
Sigma
Symmetric Difference
Average (Avg.) Width
Linear Deviation
from Avg. Width
Linear Deviation
from Avg. Width
Relative/Length
Average Width/Length

UNC

EARLI

Difference
(UNC vs.
EARLI)

p-value

3.231  1.817
3.455  1.911
.164  .091

4.069  2.345
4.228  2.515
.204  .122

-.838
-.773
-.040

.015
.040
.029

1.106  .492
138.815 
67.609
2.076  .382
.340  .111

3.104  1.696
3519.491 
12086.36
1.853  .366
.368  .148

-1.998
-220.676

.000
.000

.223
-.028

.000
.000

.020  .007

.019  .008

.001

.005

.125  .029

.100  .035

.025

.110

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A17

P1.4

P1.5

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL DETECTION OF MECONIUM IN THE
PLACENTA, FETAL MEMBRANE AND UMBILICAL CORD

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL DETECTION OF MECONIUM IN THE
LUNG OF ASPHYXIATED NEWBORNS

Naomi Furuta, Chizuko Yaguchi, Hiroaki Itoh, Keiko Muramatsu, Kaori
Yamazaki, Kotomi Nagahashi, Naoaki Tamura, Toshiyuki Uchida, Kazunao
Suzuki, Kazuhiro Sugihara, Naohiro Kanayama
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu city, Japan

Naomi Furuta, Chizuko yaguchi, Hiroaki Itho, Keiko Muramatsu, Kaori
Yamazaki, Kotomi Nagahashi, Naoaki Tamura, Toshiyuki Uchida, Kazunao
Suzuki, Kazuhiro Sugihara, Naohiro Kanayama
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu City, Japan

Objectives: We often experience meconium-stained amniotic ﬂuid ,one
side ,it is known the source of meconium aspiration syndrome. At the time
meconium-stained amniotic ﬂuid , it is adsorptioned amnion and englobemented to macrophage. We can observe it as brownish composure at HE
stain. But it is difﬁcult to distinguish meconium-stained and hemosiderin,
macrophage in inﬂammation. So we examined useful diagnosis of
meconium.
Methods: We previously reported the speciﬁc presence of zinc coproporphyrin I (ZnCP-I) in human meconium and demonstrated the
possible diagnostic use of an elevation in maternal plasma ZnCP-I levels in
cases of amniotic ﬂuid embolism. In this study, we newly developed
a speciﬁc monoclonal antibody for ZnCP-I and applied it to the immunostaining of meconium in the placenta, fetal membrane, and umbilical
cord.
Results: Immunoreactivity of ZnCP-I clearly and speciﬁcally identiﬁed
meconium in the placenta, fetal membrane, and umbilical cord. It was
especially useful in cases of sever chorioamnionitis to detect meconium in
the macrophages surrounded by numerous neutrophils. Meconium was
detected in clear amniotic ﬂuid at delivery, especially in cases of premature
rupture of membrane, suggesting previous exposure.
Conclusion: Immunohistochemical detection of ZnCP-I is a highly
sensitive histological diagnosis of meconium.

Objectives: The role of meconium as the primary factor contributing to
meconium aspiration syndrome is controversial, because autopsy studies
have suggested prenatal origins of intrauterine infection and/or chronic
hypoxia. We speculate that the inavailability of universal diagnostic
criteria for meconium staining in the fetal or neonatal lung is one of the
reasons for the confusion.
Methods: We recently developed a speciﬁc monoclonal antibody for
ZnCP-I and applied it to the immunostaining of meconium in the placenta
showing that meconium was mostly present in the CD 68-positive
macrophages in the tissues. In the present study, we applied to the
immunostaining of meconium in the lung of two newborns complicated
with thick meconium obtained at autopsy. One case was intrauterine fetal
death at 30 weeks of gestation due to severe hydrops fetalis. Anther case
was neonatal death after cesarean delivery at 35 weeks of gestation due to
non-reassuring fetal status.
Results: Clear immunostaining of ZnCP-I was detected in the lung tissues;
however immunostaining of CD68 was distributed different places. It was
suggested that the meconium was present independent of macrophages in
the lung tissue of newborns, as a different manner comparing to the
placental tissue.
Conclusion: Monoclonal antibody for ZnCP-I would be useful to establish
the histological diagnostic criteria for the lung of meconium aspiration
syndrome. The study is ongoing.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A18

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.6

P1.7

PLACENTAL PATHOLOGY ASSOCIATED WITH FETAL CARDIAC
ANOMALIES

CORRELATIONS BETWEEN INTRAVILLOUS SCREENING AND
PLACENTAL FUNCTIONAL EFFICIENCY: THE INFLUENCE OF
VILLOUS CAPILLARY GEOMETRY ONTO OXYGEN TRANSPORT
FLUX

Kikuchi Mariko1, Soma Hiroaki1, Tochigi Hideno1, Nakagami Hiroko1, Oguro
Tatsuo1, Itakura Atsuo1, Ishihara Osamu1, Murai Noriko1,2, Tanaka Kayoko1,2
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saitama Medival School,
Saitama, Japan, 2Division of Morphological Science, Biomedical Center,
Saitama Medical School, Saitama, Japan
Objectives: To identify placental pathology associated with nonreassuring fetal status(NRFS) and fetal cardiac anomalies(CA) showing
fetal hypoxia.
Methods: Placentas and umbilical cords obtained from 41 infants with
NRFS and 35 infants suffering from CA including 3 cases with chromosomal anomalies were investigated by histopathology and ultrastructural
observations from 2009 to 2011 at Saitama Medical School.
Results:

1) A total of 33 infants with NRFH (80.5%) and 18 infants with CA
(51.4%) were delivered by Cesarean section.
2) Premature infants before 35 weeks of gestation were highly
found in 60% among CA group, in contrast with 29.3% of the
NRFS group.
3) In addition, frequencies of fetal body weight under 2500g and
placental weight below 300g were also higher (60%, 54.3%) in
the CA group than (29.3%, 31.7%, respectivity) in the NRFS
group.
4) As characteristics of placental lesions between both groups,
marginal and velamentous insertion of the cord was higher
(25.7%) in the CA group than 9.8% in the NRFS group. In
particular, SUA cord was highly found (11.4%) in the CA group.
On histology, the frequencies of thrombosis and chorangiosis
were highly seen in 27.8% and 9.2%, respectively in the CA
group.
5) As characteristics of surface ultrastructural ﬁndings, cord
vessels were affected by thrombotic formation and disruption
of endothelium.

Joshua Gill1, Dimitri Vvedensky1, Carolyn Salaﬁa2, Denis Grebenkov3,
Samantha VanHorn1
1
Imperial College London, London, UK, 2Placental Analytics, LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 3Laboratoire de Physique de la Matiere Condensee, Ecole
Polytechnique, Palaiseau Cedex, France
Objectives: We have previously shown that segmented digital photomicrographs can be used as a geometric basis for solving stationary diffusion
equations, calculating oxygen ﬂux, with diffusion screening quantiﬁed by
comparing numerical and theoretical maximum oxygen ﬂuxes. We now
test whether our calculated oxygen ﬂux and extensive diffusion screening
("screening factor") are correlated with placental functional efﬁciency
expressed as beta¼ (ln[placental weight]/ln[birth weight]).
Methods: Multiple digital images were obtained from digitized slides from
22 term placentas selected from a well described birth cohort (www.cpc.
unc.edu/projects/pin). Images were traced and segmented as published.
Flux and screening factor were calculated for each villus and averaged
across each placenta. 10310 capillaries were segmented for this analysis.
Nonparametric correlations and curve estimations (SPSS) considered
p<0.05 signiﬁcant.
Results: Birth weight, placental weight and gestational age were highly
intercorrelated (each p<0.0001), but each was uncorrelated with beta
(p>0.07). Beta was signiﬁcantly correlated with both mean ﬂux (r¼-0.44,
p¼0.04), and screening factor (-0.51, p¼0.02), and for both measures, best
ﬁts were logarithmic.
Conclusion: In this small sample at term, diffusion equation solutions
from segmented images of routine stained histology slides provide
measures that signiﬁcantly correlate with placental functional efﬁciency in
terms of the grams of fetal weight generated per gram of placenta weight.
Both reduced oxygen ﬂux and increased diffusional screening correlates
with lower placental functional efﬁciency, suggesting that poor transport
of oxygen in terminal villi results in less mass of fetus per mass of placenta.

Conclusions: Pathological lesions of placenta including cord vessels
corresponded closely to the pathogenesis of fetal cardiac abnormality.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.8

P1.9

FRESH VERSUS FORMALIN FIXED HUMAN PLACENTAE: DOES
PRESERVATION AFFECT CHORIONIC PLATE MEASURES?

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY: THROUGH THICK AND THIN

1

1

1

1

Yingying Li , Carolyn Salaﬁa , Pascal Getreuer , Dawn Misra , Philip
Katzman2, Luis Ruffolo2, Richard Miller2, John Moye3, Vanguard Sites
National Children’s Study4
1
Placental Analytics, LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 2University of Rochester,
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA, 3National Institute of
Health, National Institute of Child Health & Human Development,
Bethesda, MD, USA, 4South Dakota State University, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, Columbia University, University of Utah, University of California
at Irvine, University of North Carolina, University of Wisconsin, The C,
South Dakota, New York, Utah, California, North Carolina, Wisconsin,
Pennsylvania, USA
Goals: We have previously demonstrated that chorionic plate shape is
predictive of placental functional efﬁciency and birth weight in a birth
cohort collected at a single institution. The NCS will receive both fresh and
formalin ﬁxed placentae. The extent to which information generated from
images under these different circumstances is equivalent needs to be
quantiﬁed.
Materials and Methods: Fresh and ﬁxed photographs of the fetal chorionic
surface from more than 50 placentae collected in the National Children’s
Study were analyzed. Perimeters were extracted manually and using an
automated extraction algorithm from both image types. Geometric
measures (area, perimeter, radius, radial standard deviation) and Fourier
series coefﬁcients were calculated for all four perimeter sets, and values
were compared for correlation within image type (automated versus
manual) and within perimeter extraction method (fresh versus ﬁxed).
Results: Comparing fresh and ﬁxed placentae, correlations ranged from
0.850 (mean radius)-0.945 (surface perimeter) but was more variable for
Fourier coefﬁcients that quantify perimeter irregularity (as low as 0.60).
Comparing automated and manually traced fresh and ﬁxed perimeters, the
correlations were similar but automated measures consistently overestimated the manually traced measures; image inspection showed this
was due to inclusion of deep shadow as disk surface. Automated measures
performed equally to manual measures on irregularly shaped chorionic
plates.
Conclusions: Fresh and ﬁxed photographs may be used interchangeably
for analysis of chorionic plate variables, but ﬁxation alters the apparent
perimeter of an irregularly shaped placenta. Automated methods can be
a cost-effective alternative to manual tracing in regularly shaped placentae
once corrections to the algorithm improve shadow discrimination.
Fresh images are most useful for capturing placental shape irregularity.
(Supported by NIH-NCS LOI-BIO-2-18)

A19

William Ackerman1, Toshihiro Takizawa2, John Robinson1
1
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA, 2Nippon Medical School,
Tokyo, Japan
Insights into the structure and function placental cells are facilitated
through the use of immunohistochemistry, which can be coupled with
several modalities of microscopy. While routinely employed, there remain
a number of limitations associated with these methods which have
impeded attempts to describe in detail the architecture of this fundamentally important organ. Immunolabeling of whole mounts of ﬁxed
villous tissue, or relatively thick (15 mm) sections derived thereof, is
practical for examining the three-dimensional cellar architecture within
villi. However, issues relating to antibody penetration and practical
limitations of confocal imaging systems limit both resolution and quantitative interpretability. Physical planarization of tissues, achieved by
generating ultrathin (50-200 nm) sections, eliminates difﬁculties arising
with staining and imaging efﬁciency associated with increasing tissue
depth, but lacks important volumetric information. Recently, a technique
has been developed termed "array tomography", which offers the advantages of very high z-axis resolution with signiﬁcant improvements in
volumetric imaging. This method centers around embedding ﬁxed specimens in a hydrophilic acrylic resin (LR White), which can be cut into
ultrathin serial sections that are amenable to immunolabeling, including
immunoﬂuorescence microscopy. These serial sections, representing
substantial tissue volumes, can then be ﬂuorescently imaged and subsequently reconstructed into three-dimensional renderings, so as to provide
spatial context along the optical axis without compromising detailed
axial resolution. In addition, these same sections can be imaged using
backscatter electron microscopy, which allows for the use of correlative
light and electron microscopy. In this workshop report, the practical
applications of this procedure to study detailed arrangements of the
molecular architecture within placental villi will be discussed.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A20

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.10

P1.11

THE IMPORTANCE OF SUB-PROTEOME ANALYSIS IN HEALTH
AND DISEASE

CHORIONIC VASCULAR “FIT”, CORD CENTRALITY AND FETAL
GROWTH RESTRICTION

John Robinson, William Ackerman, Dale Vandre
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA

Carolyn Salaﬁa1, Michael Yampolsky2, Oleksandr Shlahkter2, Dawn Misra3,
Barbara Eucker4, John Thorp4
1
Placental Analytics LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 2University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada, 3Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI,
USA, 4University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA

Proteomics analysis is an excellent means to determine the protein
complement in a given biological sample. Ideally, one could directly
determine the full complement of expressed proteins in an organ such as
the placenta. However, in practice this is not feasible due to the large
dynamic range of protein expression in a given organ, tissue, or cell. Low
abundance proteins, which are often of most interest, tend to be under
represented in this sort of analysis. One way to address this problem is to
analyze sub-proteomes of the organ, tissue, or cell of interest. We have
focused on a speciﬁc sub-proteome of the human placenta, namely the
apical plasma membrane of the syncytiotrophoblast. We have developed
methods to isolate highly enriched preparations of this membrane. Further
sub-proteomes were generated from the apical plasma membrane by
a series of extraction steps designed to disrupt protein-protein interactions
in an effort to obtain a sample enriched for integral plasma membrane
proteins. This fraction was suitable for mass spectrometry and proteomics
analysis. We identiﬁed 340 proteins in which at least two unique peptides
were detected for each of these proteins. Forty of these proteins were not
previously known to be expressed by the syncytiotrophoblast. The identiﬁcation of these latter proteins represents unique opportunities in
placental disease research. For example, we have studied one of these
proteins, dysferlin, and found that there was decreased expression in
placentas from severe pre-eclampsia when compared to gestational-age
matched controls.

Objective: To examine the hypothesis that poor “ﬁt” of the chorionic
vessels to the chorionic plate area and asymmetric growth of vessels from
the cord insertion are correlated with reduced fetal growth.
Methods: 1001 consecutive consenting mothers delivering singleton
live-born infants had placentas collected, and digitally photographed and
weighed. The perimeter of the chorionic disk was traced; cord insertion
and the sites at which each chorionic vessel dived beneath the chorionic
plate were marked. The area and perimeter demarcated by the diving sites
was calculated. Dimensionless ratios of chorionic vascular area / chorionic
disk area, distance between centroids of the inner and outer areas (intercentroid distance), and distance from cord insertion to the disk area
centroid were analyzed with regression, with p<0.05 signiﬁcant. Beta was
calculated as ln(placental weight)/ ln (birth weight). The observed/
expected birth weight ratio (OER) was calculated as the birthweight/ the
predicted birth weight based on gestational age and placental weight in
regression analysis.
Results: The ratio of the vascular coverage area to the chorionic plate
area was signiﬁcantly correlated with both OER (r¼0.08, p¼0.016) and beta
(r¼ -0,08, p¼0,009). The ratio of the irregularities of the vascular areas and
chorionic plate areas (symmetric difference ratio) was highly corrected
with beta (r¼-0.11, p<0.0001), a diagnosis of preeclampsia (r¼-0.074,
p¼0.019). Preeclampsia was also associated with a greater ratio of cord
displacements in vascular and chorionic surface areas (p¼.014, pþ0.001).
Conclusions: How the chorionic plate surface vessels cover the chorionic
plate is signiﬁcantly related to the OER, beta, and also a diagnosis of
preeclampsia. Further in preeclampsia, the chorionic vessels are centered
differently on the plate, resulting in a greater ratio of cord displacement in
vascular area compared to the plate area. The simple measure of chorionic
vascular extent may illuminate aspects of placental functional efﬁciency,
and inefﬁciencies that are seen in pathologies like preeclampsia.
(Support – K23 1-MH067857 NIMH)

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A21

P1.12

P1.13

PREGNANCY OUTCOMES AFTER BARIATRIC SURGERY

THE CHORIONIC SURFACE VASCULAR NETWORK IN HUMAN
PLACENTAE: WHAT CAN BE MEASURED AND DOES IT MATTER?

Mahmood Siddiqui1, Michael Lewis1, Carolyn Salaﬁa1,2, Samantha
VanHorn1,2, Peter Gorecki1, Jacqueline Bush1, Sanford Lederman1
1
New York Methodist Hospital, Brooklyn, NY, USA, 2Institute for Basic
Research, Staten Island, NY, USA
Objective: To investigate pregnancy outcomes after bariatric surgery (BS)
and the relationship between birth weight (BW) and placental weight
(PW) at time of delivery against a control group (CG) of patients of similar
gestational age (GA) and BMI who did not undergo BS.
Method: This study is a retrospective chart review of patients in a single
community hospital consisting 32 patients who underwent BS prior to
conception and who had a subsequent singleton pregnancy. The CG
consisted of 39 randomly selected patients with a preconception BMI of
>35 (total n¼71). The primary outcomes measured were GA, mode
of delivery, rates of gestational diabetes (GD) and hypertensive disorder of
pregnancy (HDP), and difference in BW, PW, and fetoplacental weight ratio
(fpr). ANOVA and chi square tests were used in statistical analysis.
Results: There was no signiﬁcant difference in GA and the rate of GD and
HDP in the BS group vs. the CG. BW was signiﬁcantly lower in the BS group
than the CG (3027g þ 664g vs. 3417g þ 701g, p ¼ .006). Neonates were
more likely to be SGA in the BS group than the CG (25% vs. 3%, p¼.005), and
more likely to be LGA in the CG (13%) than the BS group (3%, p>.05).
Additionally, the PW was lower in the BS group than the CG (416g þ 123g
vs. 555g þ 120g, p¼.000) and the fpr also differed between the BS group vs.
CG (7.62 þ 2.33 vs. 6.08 þ 1.02, p¼.001).
Conclusion: BS was not associated with reduction in comorbid diseases
associated with pregnancy such as GD and HDP, but was associated with an
increase in SGA infants and low PW. The weight loss and marked reduction
in food intake following gastric bypass surgery does have some effect on
the growth of the fetus and placenta. Therefore, we recommend careful
monitoring of expectant mothers who have a history of gastric bypass
surgery.

Yingying Li1, Carolyn Salaﬁa1, Oleksandr Shlahkter1, Pascal Getreuer1,
Dawn Misra1, Philip Katzman2, Luis Ruffolo2, John Moye3, Vanguard Sites
National Children’s Study4
1
Placental Analytics LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 2University of Rochester,
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA, 3National Institute of
Health, National Institute of Child Health & Human Development,
Bethesda, MD, USA, 4South Dakota State University, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, Columbia University, University of Utah, University of California
at Irvine, University of North Carolina, University of Wisconsin, The C,
South Dakota, New York, Utah, California, North Carolina, Wisconsin,
Pennsylvania, USA
Goal: Chorionic vascular surface networks are well recognized to be highly
variable but they have mainly been described in relation to the site of
umbilical cord insertion; their description is limited to “magistral” or
“disperse”, terms of problematic utility for quantitative analysis. However,
digital images have rendered these networks amenable to quantitative
assessment. What variables can be extracted, and how do they correlate
with other established measures of the placental disk?
Materials and Methods: We calculated from chorionic vascular tracings
the following variables: arterial, venous and total chorionic vascular area,
arterial, venous and total chorionic vascular branch number, and arterial,
venous and total branch point numbers. We compared these variables to
placental volume, disk thickness and its variability.
Results: Correlations with total vascular surface area and total vascular
branch point numbers were strongly correlated with disk thickness,
thickness variability but not placental volume. As total chorionic vascular
area and branch point numbers increased, there was decreased disk
thickness (r¼ 0.58, 0.85, p¼0.04, p<0.001) and decreased thickness
variability (r¼ 0.49, 0.62, p¼0.06, p¼0.014.)
Conclusions: The architecture of the chorionic surface vessels, laid down
by mid gestation, is correlated with the later arborization of villi that
results in disk thickness. The more extensive the surface arborization and
more extensive the branching, the more uniform the underlying disk and
more uniform the villous arborization. Measurement of the surface
vasculature may provide insights into the gestational history of stressors
germane to fetal well-being. (Supported by NIH-NCS-LOI-BIO-2-18)

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A22

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.14

P1.15

COST-EFFECTIVE, REPRODUCIBLE, AND RELIABLE AUTOMATED
DIAGNOSIS OF INTRAAMNIOTIC INFECTION FOR POPULATION
BASED RESEARCH FROM PLACENTAE IN THE NATIONAL
CHILDREN’S STUDY

ACCURACY OF 2D AND 3D MEASUREMENT OF PLACENTA
SHAPE

Dawn Misra1, Carolyn Salaﬁa2, Pascal Getreuer2, Yingying Li2, Philip
Katzman3, Luis Ruffolo3, Richard Miller3, John Moye4, Vanguard Sites
National Children’s Study5
1
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA, 2Placental
Analytics LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 3University of Rochester, School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA, 4National Institute of Health,
National Institute of Child Health & Human Development, Bethesda, MD,
USA, 5South Dakota State University, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
Columbia University, University of Utah, University of California at Irvine,
University of North Carolina, University of Wisconsin, The C, South Dakota,
New York, Utah, California, North Carolina, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, USA
Goals: Intraamniotic infection is a major risk factor for preterm birth
(the greatest single agent of perinatal morbidity and mortality) as well as
a contributor to the development of cerebral palsy and other signiﬁcant
childhood diseases. As such, its diagnosis needs to be both reliable
(reproducible in the same patient, and across patients and institutions)
and valid. Unfortunately, current diagnostic pathology "gold standards"
are neither reliable nor have they been validated against measures other
than group consensus. We tested our image analysis software to determine
the extent to which they may replace the current best practice in routine
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), and provide reliable diagnoses at signiﬁcant
cost savings to the NCS.
Materials and Methods: H&E stained slides of umbilical cord cross
sections were digitized and regions of interest (ROIs) submitted for
automated image analysis. Receiver operator curve (ROC) analyses determined sensitivity and speciﬁcity, with the goal to select a threshold that
maximizes both the sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Following the image
segmentation work of Perkins et al., this work proposes a ﬂexible method
for detection of neutrophils.
Results: ROC curve analyses were ﬁrst performed on a high risk set of cases
for which the ROIs had already been read by one of three pathologists.
These data were selected because of their higher than average prevalence
of infection would provide for a more valid assessment of neutrophil
detection. Based on the ROC analysis, the classiﬁcation distinguished
stronger infections (score 3 or 4) with 0.663 area under the curve,
however, classiﬁcation of mild infections (score 2) was unsuccessful with
0.502 area under the curve.
Conclusions: Continued testing will be necessary to improve the performance of the algorithm in a general population to improve cost savings by
exclusion of true negatives with reduced false positives. (Supported by
NIH-NCS-LOI-2-18)

Pascal Getreuer1, Theresa Girardi1, Yingying Li1, Carolyn Salaﬁa2, Jeffrey
Dalton1, Philip Katzman2, Luis Ruffolo2, Richard Miller2, John Moye3,
Vanguard Sites National Children’s Study4
1
Placental Analytics LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 2University of Rochester,
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA, 3National Institute of
Health, National Institute of Child Health & Human Development,
Bethesda, MD, USA, 4South Dakota State University, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, Columbia University, University of Utah, University of California
at Irvine, University of North Carolina, University of Wisconsin, The C,
South Dakota, New York, Utah, California, North Carolina, Wisconsin,
Pennsylvania, USA
We have shown that placental dimensions apart from weight account for
birth weight variance in the National Collaborative Perinatal Project
(CPP, 1959–1974). Diameters, qualitative description of shape and a single
disk thickness were measured with a ruler. In the National Childrens’ Study
(NCS), an ongoing study of þ100,000 children, we collect photographs of
fetal surface and slices and 3D surface scans. Does modern technology
improve on the CPP measures?
We measure placental shape in two ways: (1) digital photographs of the
fetal surface, and for measurement of thickness, the placenta is sliced and
photographed; (2) the 3D shape of the placenta surface is captured using
a FlexScan 3D Scanner. We implement the CPP volume for comparison
using the diameters and the mean thickness computed from the 3D scan.
This thickness measurement is generously accurate, since it can only be
crudely estimated with a ruler.
In simulated measurements on the 3D mesh, the CPP volume had average
error of 4.92%. Volume computed using the simulated slices had average
error of 1.28%. CPP volume error was signiﬁcantly correlated with the
difference between the ellipse and the fetal surface area, which shows that
much of the error is due to CPP’s elliptic model.
In non-simulated measurements, we again found that volume estimated
from slices is more accurate than the CPP method, although both
approaches had higher error than when simulated. Volume estimates from
the CPP method differed on average by 11.7% from the 3D mesh volume.
Estimates from photographs differed on average by 8.6%.
We believe that our precise and robust measures will provide greater
clarity as related to cognitive and somatic outcomes with placental
growth. (Supported by NIH-NCS-LOI-BIO-2-18)

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A23

P1.16

P1.17

HOW TO SLICE THE PLACENTAL DISK - ONE-PROTOCOL-FITSALL OR A SPECIMEN-SPECIFIC APPROACH?

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL PECULIARITIES OF PLACENTAL
ONCOMARKERS BY PATHOLOGICAL CHANGES

Theresa Girardi1, Carolyn Salaﬁa1, Pascal Getreuer1, Yingying Li1, Jeffrey
Dalton1, Samantha VanHorn1, Richard Miller2, Philip Katzman2, Luis
Ruffolo2, John Moye3, Vanguard Sites National Children’s Study4
1
Placental Analytics LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 2University of Rochester,
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA, 3National Institute of
Health, National Institute of Child Health & Human Development,
Bethesda, MD, USA, 4South Dakota State University, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, Columbia University, University of Utah, University of California
at Irvine, University of North Carolina, University of Wisconsin, The C,
South Dakota, New York, Utah, California, North Carolina, Wisconsin,
Pennsylvania, USA

Tamara Zadorozhna, Vasylyi Podolsky, Olga Eschenko, Olga Parnytska,
Svetlana Kylykhevich, Tatyana Archakova, Natalia Scryptchenko
Institute of Paediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kyiv, Ukraine

Goals: Conventionally, placentas have been suggested to be sliced at 1cm
intervals, but are often impractical. We implemented a simpler method of
slicing in eighths. Placentas with variable shape may have the most
problematic intrauterine environments, and thus be of greatest interest to
the NCS. We sought to determine, using virtual slicing of 3D volume scans,
the robustness of the current one-size ﬁts-all grossing protocol , and the
effect of placental size and shape variability on estimates.
Materials and Methods: 3D scans from 70 placentas collected as part of
the NCS Morphology Project were used. Placental volume estimates from
virtual slices obtained at 8 and 12, and at decreasing intervals 1cm and 0.5
cm, were compared to the gold standard from the 3D volume scan.
Results: Volume estimates from 8 slices are on average 1.23% difference
with the gold standard and thickness mean on average have 2.31% difference. Variable placental shapes, those likely of most interest to the NCS due
to the gestational struggles altered shape implies, show a difference with
the gold standard with <3.31% in volume and <9.42% in the mean
thickness. As the slices number increase, the errors decrease both in
volume and thickness mean. However, in practice, it becomes more
challenge to cut placentas into too many thin slices.
Conclusions: As the number of virtual slices of 3D shapes increases, the
correlation of volume estimates with volume from a 3D volume scan
approaches 1.00. However, in practice, small number of slices is easier to
cut and process. After simulating slicing placentas in different numbers
with 70 3D volume scan data, we found that our current protocol (8
slices) is a consistent and reliable method for volume estimation and
thickness regardless of placental size and shape. (Supported by NIH-NCS
LOI-BIO-2-18)

Objectives: The objective of this study was to evaluate immunohistochemical peculiarities of placental oncomarkers in women with benign
tumors and cancer
Methods: Women (aged 24 to 30 years) were with benign tumors of the
uterus- I group, after surgical treatment of papillary thyroid carcinoma- II
group, with physiological pregnancy and delivery- III group. It was
immunohistochemical evaluation of Ki-67, Bax, Bcl-2, p53, CEA, Cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and Vimentin expression in placenta (39-40 weeks of
gestation)
Results: Intensive nuclear expression of Ki-67 was found in cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast and less intensive in stromal cells, vascular
endothelium with reliable of proliferative index in II group of investigation.
CEA cytoplasmic expression of stromal cells was found in all cases of II
group, 2 cases – of I group and was absent in all cases of III group. Nuclear
p53 expression was focal in extravillous trophoblast of II group. Strongly
marked cytokeratin expression was evaluated in epithelial structures of
villi with abnormal architectonics in the II group.
Conclusion: Immunohistochemical markers of Ki67, CEA, p53 were
strongly marked in placenta from women with papillary thyroid
carcinoma.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A24

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.18

P1.19

MORPHOLOGICAL AND IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL
PECULIARITIES OF PLACENTA AFTER IVF TREATMENT
WITH OOCYTE DONATION

PROGRESSION OF VUE IS REPRESENTED WITH TERMINAL
VILLOUS INFLAMMATION OF CYTOTOXIC T CELLS AND
ASCENDING INFLAMMATION OF INTRAVILLOUS SPACE
PROGRESS TO VASCULOPATHY

Tamara
Zadorozhna,
Larisa
Tumanova,
V
Bannykov,
Grebynytchenko
Institute of Paediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kyiv, Ukraine

Ganna

Objectives: The objective of this study was to evaluate morphological and
immunohistochemical peculiarities of placenta after IVF treatment with
oocyte donation.
Methods: The I group - 55 women after IVF treatment with oocyte
donation, the II group – 60 patients after IVF treatment with own oocytes,
the III – 53 women after natural fertilization. Morphological investigation
was done on parafﬁn-embedded sections with hematoxylin-eosin and
Van-Gieson stain. Immunohistochemical evaluation of TNF and CD 31 were
performed.
Results: Focal pathological immaturity of villous tree as intramediate
differentiated villi and disorder sclerosed villi was evaluated in 84,6% of
the I group. Hypoplasia of decidua with dystrophic changes was found in
the most cases of the I group. Intensive and moderate TNF-a expression
was revealed in the stroma of villi and in epithelial cells. The level of TNF-a
expression in endothelium and decidual cells was the same as in III group.
Strongly marked expression of CD-31 was evaluated in endothelial cells in
placenta of the II group.
Conclusion: Morphological and Immunohistochemical ( TNF-a and CD-31)
changes were found in placenta of the I group.

Kentaro Matsuoka1, Yuki Ito1, Haruhiko Sago1, Atsuoko Nakazawa1,
Kenichiro Hata2
1
National center for child health and development, Tokyo, Japan, 2National
Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: Chronic villitis is deﬁned by a chronic inﬂammatory inﬁltrate
in the chorionic villi and divided into two groups, infectious villitis and
so-called villitis of unknown etiology (VUE). VUE is associated with various
problems such as fetal growth restriction, recurrent abortions, prematurity, abnormal neurologic development, and intrauterine fetal demise.
Two suggestions have been presented the cause of VUE. First, VUE is an
infectious disease caused by a yet recognized agent or an agent that cannot
be identiﬁed from placental examination. The second theory is that VUE is
an immune reaction between mother and fetus.
Methods: To clarify the process of villous inﬂammatory process in VUE, we
examined six placentas with VUE.
Results: Then we ﬁnd out the three inﬂammatory phases of chronic villitis.
First phase is the “perivillous inﬂammation phase”. At this stage CD8
positive cytotoxic T lymphocytes “wrap” the terminal villous tissue and
destroy the basement membrane. Second phase is “intravillous phase”.
At this phase CD8 positive T lymphocytes exist at the intravillous space.
And those cells migrate within the intravillous space. There is no villous
surface inﬂammation. Finally inﬂammation progress to “vasculopathy
stage”. At this stage fetal vessels are deranged and occluded. According to
the vasculopathy villous stromal become ﬁbrotic. All of T lymphocytes are
positive for CD8 and also express the pore-forming protein “perforine” and
apoptosis-inducing “granzyme B”.
Conclusion: These cytotoxic T cells destroy the musculature of fetal vessels
and occlude the vasculature.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.20

P1.21

AN ANATOMICAL RECORDS OF MONOCHORIONICMONOAMNIOTIC TWIN PLACENTA IN LATE 18TH CENTURY
JAPAN

DEVELOPMENT OF BOVINE EMBRYOS DERIVED FROM
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNIQUES

Marie Taga, Masao Koike, Hiroshi Nakano, Satoshi Hayakawa
Nihon University, School of Medicine, Itabashiku, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: Placentas of mammalian animals are known since ancient eras.
Aristotle recorded natures of human placentas obtained through normal
deliveries However, their structure and functions are not known until 19th
century. Leonardo da Vinci and Vesalius confused human placentas to
those of carnivores. In order to examine anatomical understanding of
placenta by Japanese physicians during Edo period (1603-1868 CE, an
anatomical records of female cadaver was examined.
Methods: We observed detailed anatomical records of twin placentas in
colored hand-writing original sketch in A.D.1800 Japan owned by Nihon
University library. The sketch was one of the oldest anatomical records in
feudal Japan and the only case of pregnant woman. Two physicians of
Western medical school, namely OYA-SHOSAI, FUSHIYA-SOTEKI, and an
orthopedic surgeon KAGAMI-BUNKEN performed autopsy of executed
female cadaver under ofﬁcial permission of shogunate regime.
Results: The name and guilt of the female criminal was unknown but she
was 37 years old. The records show healthy thoracic, abdominal and pelvic
organs including pregnant uterus. Uterine content was illustrated in detail.
A monochorionic-monoamniotic twin placenta located at uterine fundus
with detailed blood vessels, umbilical cords with three vessels and fetal
membranes. They also described two near term fetal ﬁndings. One looked
healthy while the other was degenerated. Since the presence/or absence of
fetal membranous septum and vascular anastomoses were not described
until late 18th century European textbooks, we believe the ﬁndings of
placenta in this record is based on their original observations. Shogunate
government of Japan permitted autopsy of dead bodies in 1755. The ﬁrst
Japanese textbook of anatomy translated from Dutch “Tafel-anatomie” was
published in 1774.
Conclusion: The presented anatomical record of pregnant uterus and
feto-placental unit by late 18th century Japanese doctors were accurate and
we can make some pathological speculations from their observations.

A25

Míryan Lança Vilia Alberto1, Flavio Vieira Meirelles2, Carlos Eduardo
Ambrósio2, Phelipe Oliveira Favaron1, Andrea Maria Mess1, Marcelo
Bertolini3, Maria Angelica Miglino1
1
Department of Surgery, School of Veterinary Medicine and Animal
Science, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil,2Faculty of
Animal Sciences and Food Engineering, University of Sao Paulo, Pirassununga, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3University of Fortaleza, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil
Assisted reproduction techniques have improved agricultural breeding in
bovines. However, the development of embryos and fetal membranes may
differ from the situation in vivo and there is a high mortality rate during
the ﬁrst trimester of gestation.
Objectives: In order to better understand the impact of these methods, we
investigated the development of embryos and fetal membranes derived
from ﬁxed-time artiﬁcial insemination (FTAI), in vitro fertilization (IVF),
and nuclear transfer (NT).
Methods: A total of 20 embryos were collected following FTAI at 25, 27, 29,
30, 40, and 45 days of gestation. For IVF were used 11 embryos on days 24,
28, 32, 36, 40, and 44 of gestation and 9 embryos derived from NT at 9, 28,
32, 36, 40, and 43 days of gestation. Embryos were collected following
FTAI, IVF, and NT. The methodologies included macroscopic and morphometric studies, as well as light and electron microscopic procedures.
Results: The onset of yolk sac development was not normal in cloned
embryos. Latter steps differ from the condition in vivo in all three groups;
the yolk sac was yellowish and juxtaposed with the amniotic membrane.
The vascularization of the chorioallantoic membrane was low in NT
gestations, but normal in the other groups. The overall development of the
embryos was normal in FTAI and IVF pregnancies, whereas in some NT
embryos the liver and other organs completely occupied the abdominal
cavity. In addition, the cloned embryos exhibited abnormalities in heart
development.
Conclusion: In conclusion, especially the yolk sac seems to be vulnerable
to severe morphogenetic alterations. This may be responsible for the high
incidence of embryonic, fetal, and postnatal mortality, especially in clones.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A26

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.22

P1.23

THERE IS NO ROYAL ROAD FOR PLACENTAL EXAMINATION

DEVELOPMENTAL TRAJECTORIES OF MICROSCOPIC PLACENTAL
ARCHITECTURE AND FETAL GROWTH IN THE VERVET MONKEY
(CHLOROCEBUS SABAEUS)

Masayoshi Arizawa
Ohtuka Hospital, Toshimaku, Tokyo, Japan
Purpose: Not only am I writing this report merely in terms a pathological
diagnosis, but also, in regard to the work of the pathologist. Many
pathologists already recognize that pathologic education and enlightenment are important, extending this awareness has become my mission,
and I have conveyed the signiﬁcance of the examination of placenta to
obstetricians for the last four years. The content of my work consists of
three fundamental questions. 1. Why should we examine placenta? 2. How
to examine the placenta？ 3. Which placenta should we examine？
Materials, method: During these four years I have examined placentas as
part of my routine works. We have held over 20 meeting in the department
of obstetrics in order to inform and convey my ﬁndings in this ﬁeld.
Results: The rate of placental examination to the number of deliveries
from 20% grew to 50%. There have been many public presentations about
the placenta in the last two years by obstetrician. The IgM was 1mg/dL,
which is normal range, but the clinical records by neonatologist shows
neonatal chronic lung disease Type III (related with inﬂammation) due to
inﬂammation of the placenta.
Discussion: 1. "Why" Examinations of placenta were in the best interest of
the patients. 2. "How" Obstetrician should observed placentas after
delivery before pathologic examination. If there is inﬂammation it is
important to start treatment as soon as possible. Inﬂammation is indicated
by the color of the placenta being whitish and having thick chorion and
amnion. 3. "Which" All placentas. If there is even the slightest chance of
some unknown problems, we need to know in advance.

Julienne Rutherford, Victoria DeMartelly
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Objective: Nonhuman primate models of placental and fetal development
are rare but have speciﬁc relevance to human growth and development.
Most data comes from term samples, but less is known about trajectories
of placental and fetal growth across gestation.
Methods: A series of 50 vervet monkey (Chlorocebus sabaeus) placentas
from the St. Kitts Biomedical Research Foundation was characterized in
terms of microscopic morphology and shifts in efﬁciency across the latter
half of a species-typical 167-day gestation. Architecture was analyzed via
stereology.
Results: Both fetal mass and placental mass increased signiﬁcantly with
gestational age (Pearson’s correlations: R¼0.85, P<0.00001; R¼0.64,
P<0.00001, respectively) but the size of the placenta relative to fetal
mass decreased signiﬁcantly between period 1 (d. 83-130) and period 2
(d. 131-159) (T-test: T¼-3.60, P<0.00001). Placental mass accrual slowed at
day 130 while fetal mass continued to increase. Though relative placental
size decreased between period 1 and period 2, the surface area of the
placental villi – the site of nutrient transport from mother to fetus –
increased signiﬁcantly, both in terms of volume (T-test: T¼-4.49,
P<0.00001) and surface area (T-test: T¼-5.33, P<0.00001). The surface
area expanded signiﬁcantly more than the underlying volume, suggestive
of increases in topographical complexity.
Discussion: These changes suggest there is an important shift in the
metabolic capacity of the placenta, via an expansion of the microscopic
surface area of the villi to support the energetic burden of late gestation
brain and somatic growth. Future work in this sample will incorporate
analyses of GLUT1 expression to characterize aspects of the transport of
glucose, the primary substrate for brain growth. A better understanding
of how the placenta drives and constrains fetal and brain growth in
anthropoid primates is thus directly relevant to developmental models of
human brain evolution.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.24

P1.25

LEVELS OF ANGIOGENIC FACTORS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH
HYDATIDIFORM MOLAR PREGNANCY

ISOLATION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF HUMAN
TROPHOBLAST PROGENITOR CELLS IN PRIMARY VILLOUS
CYTOTROPHOBLASTS AND HTR-8/SVNEO CELL LINE

Yongxiang Yin1, Min Zhao1, Fang Shen2, Jiajun Wang1, ke Wang3, Qi Chen1,4
1
Wuxi Maternity and Child Health Hospital Afﬁliated Nanjing Medical
University, Wuxi, China, 2The Obstetrics and Gynaecology Hospital of
Fudan University, Shanghai, China, 3Jiangsu Institute of Nuclear Medicine,
Wuxi, China, 4The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Objectives: Hydatidiform mole is an abnormal pregnancy, and is a type of
gestational trophoblastic disease with over proliferation of the placenta,
which causes the dysfunction of placenta. It is classiﬁed with partial
hydatidiform moles and complete hydatidiform moles. Although
more than 80% of hydatidiform moles are benign with good outcome,
hydatidiform moles are associated with very early onset preeclampsia.
Preeclampsia is associated with altered levels of angiogenic factors, such as
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble Endoglin (sEndoglin)
and soluble Flt-1 (sFlt-1). A recent study suggested that levels of
Flt-1/sFlt-1 were increased in hydatidiform molar placentae (1). The aims
of this study were to investigate the levels of Endoglin and VEGF in
hydatidiform molar placenta.
Methods: 17 placentae from complete hydatidiform mole, 8 placentae
from partial hydatidiform mole and 16 placentae from gestation matched
ﬁrst trimester were collected and the levels of Endoglin (CD105) and VEGF
expression were measured using immunohistochemistry and western
blotting.
Results: Immunohistochemical staining measured by semi–quantiﬁcation
demonstrated that levels of Endoglin expression in hydatidiform molar
placentae was signiﬁcant decreased (p¼0.04), while the levels of VEGF
expression were signiﬁcantly increased (p0.05) in hydatidiform molar
placentae, compared to normal gestation matched placentae. These
ﬁndings were also conﬁrmed by western blotting. In addition, there was no
difference in Endoglin and VEGF expression between placentae with
complete hydatidiform mole or partial hydatidiform mole.
Conclusion: In this study our data show that the levels of Endoglin were
signiﬁcantly reduced, while the levels of VEGF were signiﬁcantly increased
in ﬁrst trimester placentae with hydatidiform moles. The altered levels of
angiogenic factors may link to the mechanism of developing hydatidiform
moles.

A27

Tomoka Takao1, Kazuo Asanoma2, Norio Wake1
Research Center for Environment and Developmental Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 2Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan
1

Objectives: Recently increasing studies have demonstrated that immature
cell population including stem cells and progenitor cells can be found in
“side-population” (SP) cells. Although SP cells isolated from some adult
tissues have been reported elsewhere, isolation and characterization of
human trophoblast SP remained to be reported. In this study, we intended
to isolate and characterize human trophoblast progenitor cells.
Methods: HTR-8/SVneo cells and human primary villous cytotrophoblasts
(vCTBs) were stained with Hoechst 33342 and SP and non-SP (NSP)
fractions were isolated using a cell sorter. Expression analyses were shown
by immunohistochemistry, western blot and real-time RT-PCR.
Results: HTR-8/SVneo cells are heterogenesis in nature including vCTB,
STB and EVT cells. A small population of SP cells was identiﬁed from
HTR-8/SVneo cells and in vCTBs. SP cells expressed several vCTB-speciﬁc
markers and failed to express syncytiotrophoblast (STB) or extravillous
cytotrophopblast (EVT)-speciﬁc differentiation markers. SP cells formed
colonies and proliferated on mouse embryonic ﬁbroblast (MEF) feeder
cells or in MEF conditioned medium supplemented with heparin/FGF2,
and they also showed long-term repopulating property. SP cells could
differentiate into both STB and EVT cell lineages and expressed several
differentiation markers. Microarray analysis revealed that IL7R and IL1R2
were exclusively expressed in SP cells and not in NSP cells. vCTB cells
sorted as positive for both IL7R and IL1R2 failed to express trophoblast
differentiation markers and spontaneously differentiated into both STB
and EVT in basal medium.
Conclusion: These features shown by SP cells suggest that IL7R and IL1R2
are available markers to detect SP cells, implicating that vCTB progenitor
cells and trophoblast stem cells are involved in SP cell population.

Reference
1. Kanter D, Lindheimer MD, Wang E et al (2010). Angiogenic
dysfunction in molar pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol; 202:
184, e1-5.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A28

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.26

P1.27

FATTY ACID BINDING PROTEIN 3 (FABP3) AS A CELLULAR
REGULATOR OF FATTY ACID TRANSPORT FROM MOTHER
TO FETUS IN RODENT PLACENTA

THE CORRELATION WITH SYNCYTIN-1 AND SYNCYTIN-2
FOR THE CELL FUSION ACTIVITY IN HUMAN PLACENTAL
BEWO CELLS

Ariful Islam1, Nobuko Tokuda1, Yasuhiro Adachi1, Tomoo Sawada1, Kazem
Shariﬁ1, Majid Ebrahimi1, Ryoji Suzuki2, Yuji Owada1
1
Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi,
Japan, 2Akita University Graduate School of Medicine, Akita, Japan

Takahiro Nobuzane, Yoshiki Kudo
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan

Objectives: Malnutrition of mother during pregnancy is now thought to
contribute to the aetiology of various metabolic and/or neural disorders
that manifest throughout life. Poly unsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are
being focused in connection with neurodevelopmental disorders from
the concept of Developmental Origin of Adult Health and Disease
(DOHaD).Placenta is the key organ for regulating the transfer of various
nutrients including fatty acids from mother to fetus. In this study, we
examined the localization of fatty acid binding proteins (FABPs), cellular
chaperons of fatty acids, in the mouse placenta and its functional
signiﬁcance.
Methods: Expression of FABPs in the mouse placenta on embryonic day (E)
11, E15 and E18 was examined by RT-PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemistry. Radio-labelled fatty acid was administrated into the
female mice at embryonic day (E) 18, and its transfer to the fetus was
measured by liquid scintillation counter.
Results: In RT-PCR, gene expression of FABP3, 4 & 5 was detected in the
mouse placenta at different stages, among FABPs (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 & 9)
examined. The protein expression of FABP3, 4 & 5 was also conﬁrmed by
western blot analysis. In immunohistochemistry, FABP3 was found to be
highly expressed in the labyrinthine (transport) zone of mouse placenta;
FABP4 was highly expressed in decidua basalis zone; FABP5 was weakly
and widely distributed in the labyrinthine, decidua and spongiotrophoblast zone. FABP7 was identiﬁed in the maternal vessels of labyrinthine
zone. In FABP3KO placenta, transportation of long chain polyunsaturated
fatty acids (LCPUFA)[u-6 & u-3] were found to be signiﬁcantly decreased
compared to wild-type.
Conclusion: FABPs were expressed in the mouse placenta with spatial
differences. FABP3 was strongly suggested to be involved in regulation of
cellular transfer of fatty acids through the trophoblast.

Objectives: Two human endogenous retroviral proteins, HERV-W
(syncytin-1) and HERV-FRD (syncytin-2) have been found to be relevant
to human trophoblast cell fusion (or syncytialization). Each has a different
localization in placenta, syncytin-1 is located in syncytiotrophoblast
predominately, and syncytin-2 in cytotrophoblast. The enhancement of
intracellular cAMP levels, via not only classical PKA but EPAC pathway,
causes cell fusion in the trophoblast derived human choriocarcinoma
BeWo cells. The interaction between these proteins and the mechanisms of
cell fusion remains less well understood.
The aim of our study is to investigate the role of syncytin-1 and syncytin-2
on cell fusion after stimulation by cAMP analogues.
Methods: BeWo cells was treated with siRNA for syncytin-1 and/or
syncitin-2 and then incubated with cAMP analogues to induced cell fusion.
The fusion associated factor, such as placental protein 13 and beta-hCG,
was evaluated by mRNA expression by means of real-time RT-PCR.
Results: The mRNA expression of the fusion associated factors was
reduced especially in the both of syncytin reduction group.
Conclusion: There are many kinds of factor to correlate with syncytialization, but syncytin-1 and 2 have great involvement with the cell fusion.
We report further investigations in this point.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.28

P1.29

HEPARIN/HEPARAN SULPHATE (HS) /CD44V3-MEDIATED
SIGNALING ENHANCES THE STRUCTURAL REPAIR OF
TROPHOBLAST CELL LAYER DAMAGED WITH MECHANICAL
SCRATCHING AND LUPUS ANTICOAGULANT-POSITIVE PLASMA

PLACENTAL RHO KINASE2 EXPRESSION IS SUPPRESSED IN
PRE-ECLAMPSIA

Motoi Sugimura, Naoko Suga, Chihiro Hirai, Hitomi Okabe, Takashi Yorifuji,
Shintaro Makino, kiyoko Kato, Satoru Takeda
Juntendo University,School of Medicine, Hongo, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: The main treatment of pregnant women with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is the anticoagulation with heparin/heparan
sulphate (HS) for the prevention of thrombin generation caused by the
hypercoagulable state in the intervillous space. Enhanced thrombin
generation induces the fetal growth restriction in animal models.
However, the mechanism of treatment with heparin still remains unclear
in the patients with APS. The function of heparin/HS /CD44v3 was investigated during trophoblast cell migration to identify its role in the repair of
syncytial layer damage caused by increased hemodynamic turbulence and
Lupus anticoagulant (LA)-positive plasma and in the maintenance of
syncytial integrity in the intervillous space as in vitro model in APS.
Methods: We evaluated the effect of heparin/HS /CD44v3-mediated
processes during scratch wound closure in monolayer immortalized
human trophoblast cells derived from term placenta (TCL-1).
Results: Western blot analysis showed that these cultured human
trophoblast cells express CD44v3. In vitro scratch wound healing assay
showed dose-dependent enhanced migration of trophoblast cells in the
presence of heparin compared with control when culture under serumfree conditions. Conversely, an anti-CD44 function blocking antibody,
CD44siRNA and LA positive-plasma suppressed the migration of cells in
the presence of heparin in a similar scratch assay. Furthermore, both
heparin treatment and in vitro scratch wounding induced the phosphorylation of p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1), while the anti-CD44v3 antibody
suppressed the heparin-induced phosphorylation of PAK1 in trophoblast
cells.
Conclusion: These results suggest that heparin/HS /CD44v3-mediated
signaling enhances the repair of the trophoblast cells layer damaged
with mechanical scratching and LA.

A29

SHINTARO SAKATE, TOMOHISA SAKASHITA, TAKAHIRO NOBUSANE,
YOSHIKI KUDO
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima City, Japan
Objectives: Rho kinase (ROCK), including the ROCK1 and ROCK2
isoformes, belongs to a family of serine/threonine kinases, which is down
stream effector of Rho A GTP ase. ROCK involves in a wide range of
fundamental cellular functions, such as contraction, adhesion, migration
and proliferations. Recent studies have shown that ROCK2 is localized in
syncytiotrophoblast (ST) of the human placental villi in third trimester.
Furthermore, it have been reported that ROCK inhibitor Y27632 inhibits
prostaglandin E2 mediated migration of extravillous trophoblast (EVT) cell
line, HTR-8/SV neo. ROCK2 might be an essential factor for EVT migration.
Impaired trophoblast invasion and spiral arterial remodeling, which
results in poor placentation during early pregnancy, leads to preeclampsia.
We therefore have investigated the expression and signiﬁcance of ROCK 2
in normal and preeclamptic placenta.
Methods: ROCK2 protein levels in villous tissue obtained from ﬁrst,
second, third trimester, and third trimester complained with preeclampsia
were assessed by Western blot and immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Results: IHC demonstrated that ROCK2 expressed in cytotrophoblast (CT)
in all pregnancy period, but not in ST. ROCK2 protein levels were not
changed signiﬁcantly with the period of pregnancy. But in preeclamptic
placentas, ROCK2 protein levels were signiﬁcantly lower compared to
normal placenta.
Conclusion: These observations suggest that ROCK2 may subsequently
develops preeclampsia.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A30

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.30

P1.31

INHIBITION OF SFLT-1 INDUCTION CAUSED BY SCRATCHING
IN THE HUMAN IMMORTALIZED TROPHOBLAST CELL LINES.
(HTR-8 SV/NEO CELLS AND TCL-1 CELLS).

HLA-G EXPRESSION IS REGULATED BY MIR-365 IN
TROPHOBLAST UNDER HYPOXIC CONDITION

Chihiro Hirai, Motoi Sugimura, Tetsunori Inagaki, Naoko Suga, Takashi
Yorifuji, Shintaro Makino, Satoru Takeda
Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan
Objective: It is known that enhanced production of sFLT1 is associated
with fetal growth restriction and preeclampsia (PE). The production and
secretion of sFLT1 are very important because it acts as a potent endogenous soluble inhibitor of VEGF- and PlGF-mediated various biological
functions. However, it remains unknown how the release of sFLT1 are
regulated into the intervillous space from the trophoblast cells.
Methods: We induced migration by scratch wounding in the human
immortalized trophoblast cell lines (HTR-8/SV neo cells and TCL-1 cells)
and examined the changes in sFLT1/FLT1/VEGF expression. The concentrations of supernatant were measured by ELISA. The expression
and production of sFLT1 in cells were examined by Western blotting and
real-time PCR. The changes were compared with controls in the presence
or absence of scratching and serum in culture medium.
Results: In HTR-8 SV/neo cells, sFLT1 was detected in the membrane
fraction, however, it was undetectable level in supernatant, regardless of
the presence or absence of serum and scratching. In contrast, sFLT1 in the
supernatant from TCL-1 cells was increased for 24 hours and decreased in
the absence of serum in culture medium. In the presence of serum in
culture medium, sFLT1 in the supernatant was suppressed and remained
unchanged. The production of sFLT1 and the expression of sFLT1 mRNA in
TCL-1 cells were not changed signiﬁcantly in the presence or absence of
scratching and serum by Western blot analysis and by real-time PCR,
respectively.
Conclusion: These results suggest that the secretion of sFLT1 into the
circulation is composed of production and release processes. Furthermore,
the release process of sFLT1 from membrane is regulated on the cells
membrane.

Asako Mitsumori, Hirotaka Nishi, Toru Sasaki, Yotaro Takaesu, Yuzo
Nagamitsu, Ei Hasegawa, Osamu Akutagawa, Chinatsu Higuma, Keiichi
Isaka
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tokyo Medical University,
Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: Hypoxia occurs during the development of placenta in the ﬁrst
trimester and is implicated in trophoblast differentiation. Intervillous
blood ﬂow increases after 10 weeks of gestation and results in exposure of
trophoblast to oxygen. Before this time, low oxygen appears to prevent
trophoblast differentiation toward an invasive phenotype. MicroRNAs
(miRNA) are noncoding single-stranded RNAs modulating gene expression
by targeting mRNA, which play a key role in various pathological and
physiological discordants. We hypothesize that trophoblast in hypoxic
condition have a unique miRNA proﬁle, which may play a critical role in
placental development.
Methods: Total RNA was extracted from human trophoblast cell line
(HchEpC1b) exposed to normoxia or hypoxia (1% O2) for 24 hours. We ﬁrst
examined the miRNA expression proﬁle using MERCURY LNA microRNA
Array. Several differential miRNAs were selected and validated using
real-time RT-PCR. We search potential targets of these miRNAs using in
silico analysis (miRBLAST). We conﬁrmed a potential target protein by
western blot analysis and luciferase assays.
Results: We found that the expression of miR-365 was signiﬁcantly higher
under hypoxia. According to the results of in silico analysis, miR-365
targeted human leukocyte antigen G (HLA-G). Hypoxic condition and
overexpression of miR-365 inhibited the HLA-G protein expression. Also,
overexpression of miR-365 decreased the activity of luciferase-reporter
containing the 3’-untranslated region (UTR) of HLA-G with the predicted
miR-365-binding site.
Conclusion: HLA-G is a non-classical HLA class-Ib molecule expressed
mainly in the extravillous cytotrophoblasts (EVT) and plays a key role in
maintaining immune tolerance at the maternal-fetal interface. Our results
indicate that miR-365 targets HLA-G 3’UTR to repress its expression. The
expression of miR-365 may play an important role in human placental
development and immunoprotection to the semiallogenic embryo.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.32

P1.33

ACTIVATION OF INTERMEDIATE CONDUCTANCE CALCIUM
ACTIVATED POTASSIUM CHANNELS (IKCA) IMPAIRS
CYTOTROPHOBLAST SYNCYTIALISATION IN VITRO

ANALYSIS OF THE GALECTIN 4 EXPRESSION DURING
TROPHOBLAST DIFFERENTIATION IN RAT PLACENTATION

Paula Díaz, Amber M. Wood, Colin P. Sibley, Susan L. Greenwood
Maternal and Fetal Health Research Centre, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK
Objectives: Regulation of syncytiotrophoblast (STB) renewal by cell
migration, aggregation/fusion and differentiation is essential for successful
pregnancy. In several tissues, cell migration/fusion is regulated by IKCa. We
used cytotrophoblasts in primary culture to test the hypothesis that IKCa
participate in the formation of multinucleate STB-like cells.
Methods: Cytotrophoblasts were isolated from normal term placentas
(n¼6) and cultured for 66h. This preparation recreates STB formation
in vivo, as mononucleate cells (15h) fuse into multinucleate syncytia (66h)
concomitant with elevated secretion of human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG). Cells were untreated (control) or treated at 3, 15 and 42h with IKCa
inhibitor TRAM34 (10mM) or activator DCEBIO (100mM). At 15, 42 and 66h,
culture medium was collected to measure hCG (mIU/ml/mg protein) and
cells ﬁxed for immunoﬂuorescence with anti-desmoplakin and anti-IKCa
antibodies to assess multinucleation (syncytial nuclei as % of total nuclei)
and IKCa expression respectively. Data are medianþ/-IQR.
Results: Cytotrophoblast multinucleation increased 11-fold (p<0.05), and
hCG secretion 45-fold (p<0.05), between 15 and 66h. Compared to
controls at 66hr, DCEBIO reduced multinucleation by 50% (26.6 30/16 vs.
13.8 17/9%; p<0.05) and hCG secretion by 95% (2497 4030/448 vs. 145
401/80; p¼0.03). This inhibition of differentiation was not caused by
cytotoxicity as total nuclei and cell protein with DCEBIO did not differ from
controls. TRAM34 did not affect cytotrophoblast multinucleation or hCG
secretion. IKCa staining was evident in the nucleus, cytoplasm and surface
of mono- and multinucleate cells.
Conclusion: Activation of IKCa inhibits formation of multinucleate
cytotrophoblasts in vitro. We reported previously that cytotrophoblast IKCa
are activated by peroxynitrite (1). As pre-eclampsia is associated with
nitrative stress, we speculate that activation of IKCa through nitration could
contribute to dysregulated STB renewal in this pregnancy complication.
Supported by CONICYT-Becas Chile 72090593 and Action Medical
Research.

A31

Tomohiro Arikawa1, Eriko Simamura2, Hiroki Shimada2, Toshihisa Hatta2,
Hiroki Shoji1
1
Department of Biology, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan,
2
Department of Anatomy, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan
Objectives: Galectins comprise a family of proteins which shares binding
afﬁnity for b-galactosides. Recently, it has been suggested that some
members of Galectin family have regulatory roles in the differentiation of
trophoblast cells. In order to understand how Galectins are involved in the
trophoblast differentiation, we have analysed the expression of Galectins
in the rat placental cell line Rcho-1 and in the rat placenta.
Methods: The differentiation of Rcho-1 cells was induced by exchanging
the growth medium into low-nutritional medium when the cells were
reached to conﬂuent. The expression of mRNA was analysed by DNA
micoarray and RT-PCR. The distribution of Galectin 4 in the rat placenta
was analysed by immunohistochemistry.
Results: The DNA microarray analysis revealed that Galectins 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8,
9 and 12 were expressed in Rcho-1. Of these, the expression of Galectin 4
was down-regulated during the differentiation of Rcho-1 cells, and the
down-regulation began within 24 hrs after the induction of differentiation.
Once the expression of Galectin 4 was inhibited, it did not recover even if
the cells were returned back into the growth medium. Also, the expression
of Galectin 4 was not affected in HT29, the colon cancer cell line, cultured
with the low-nutritional medium. These results suggest that the downregulation of Galectin 4 expression is speciﬁcally associated with the
differentiation of Rcho-1 cells. During rat placentation, we have detected
the Galectin 4 protein in the decidua, trophoblast giant cells and
spongiotrophoblasts.
Conclusion: Galectin 4 had been thought to have roles speciﬁcally in the
epithelial cells of digestive tract. However, the results of present study
suggested that Galectin 4 is also associated with the differentiation of
trophoblasts during rat placentation.

(1) P. Díaz et al. Placenta 2011; 32:A48.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A32

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.34

P1.35

REGULATION OF CCN1 AND CCN3 IN AN IN VITRO CO-CULTURE
MODEL OF HUMAN TROPHOBLAST AND ENDOMETRIAL
STROMAL CELLS

EFFECTS OF AHR ON PROLIFERATION AND MIGRATION OF
HUMAN TROPHOBLAST CELL LINES

Friederike Kipkeew1, Guy S. Whitley2, Elke Winterhager1, Alexandra
Gellhaus1, Stehanie Kaiser1
1
Department of Molecular Biology, University Hospital, Essen, Germany,
2
Division of Basic Medical Sciences, St George’s University, London, UK
Objectives: The matricellular proteins CCN1 and CCN3 are expressed in
extravillous trophoblast cells invading the maternal decidua. For successful
placentation, a balance of invasion and proliferation is crucial since
proliferation of trophoblast cells provides a continuous supply of invasive
cells. Pathologies like preeclampsia coincide with hypoinvasion of
trophoblast into the decidua. Our ﬁnding that the levels of both proteins
were decreased in early-onset preeclamptic placentas underlines the
importance of CCN regulation. Here we focus on the role of CCN1 and CCN3
in migration and proliferation properties of trophoblast cells into the
maternal decidua using an in vitro co-culture model.
Methods: To mimic the stromal compartment the human endometrial
stromal cell line T-HESC has been decidualized in vitro by a combination of
inducers (cAMP, MPA, E2). For the invasive extravillous trophoblast we use
the benign trophoblast cell line SGHPL-5, originated from ﬁrst-trimester
placental tissue.
Results: In vitro decidualized T-HESCs showed an upregulation of the
typical marker genes prolactin and IGFBP-1. Undifferentiated as well as
decidualized T-HESCs express both CCN1 and CCN3, but only CCN1 levels
increased upon the decidualization process. SGHPL-5 cells also strongly
express CCN1 and to a lesser extent CCN3. Thus, both partners exhibit
predominantly CCN1. Co-culturing SGHPL-5 with T-HESCs revealed
migration of single trophoblast cells into the border of conﬂuent T-HESCs.
To test proliferation and migration properties upon elevated CCN3 levels
we ﬁrst cultured only SGHPL-5 in the presence of recombinant human
CCN3. To our surprise SGHPL-5 then showed a signiﬁcantly reduced
proliferation. These results point out that CCN3 levels may regulate the
proliferation capacity of extravillous trophoblast which is therefore
reduced in the SGHPL-5 cell line.
Conclusion: The two cell lines represent an excellent tool to manipulate
CCN expression levels and to study the roles of CCN1 and CCN3 for
proliferation, invasion and migration properties of trophoblast cells
into the maternal compartment. In this matter CCN3 seems to reduce
proliferation of SGHPL-5, possibly to shift the trophoblast into the invasive
phenotype.

Kehong Hao2, Qian Zhou1, Kai Wang1, Tao Duan2
1
Clinical and Translational Research Center, Shanghai First Maternity and
Infant Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China,
2
Department of Obstetrics, Shanghai First Maternity and Infant Hospital,
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China
Objectives: Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-dependent transcription factor, mediates a variety of biological processes including
successful pregnancy establishment, vascular formation, and immune
system homeostasis. Recently, we have reported that AhR protein is highly
expressed in human placentas, and primarily presented in syncytiotrophoblasts within anchoring villi. However, the functional roles of AhR in
the trophoblost are still unknown.
Methods: In this study, both mRNA and protein expression levels of AhR in
human trophoblast cell lines JEG-3 and JAR were examined by RT-PCR
and Western blotting, respectively. Inducibility of CYP1A1 by the AhR
endogenous ligand [2-(1’H-indole-3’-carbonyl)-thiazole-4-carboxylic acid
methyl ester (ITE) was detected using RT-PCR. Cell proliferation and
migration in response to ITE treatment were determined by crystal violet
and Transwell chamber assays, respectively. Also, ﬂow cytometry was used
to determine cell cycle phase distribution.
Results: AhR is moderately expressed in JEG-3 cells but is undetectable in
JAR cells on both protein and mRNA levels. ITE time-dependently ( p<0.05 )
induced CYP1A1 expression in JEG-3 cells, but not in JAR cells. ITE significantly ( p<0.05 ) inhibited JEG-3 cell proliferation in a dose-dependent
manner characterized by S cell cycle phase arrest, but did not change JAR
cell proliferation as well as cell cycle phase distribution. Furthermore, no
changes were observed on JEG-3 and JAR cells migration in response to ITE
treatment.
Conclusion: ITE signiﬁcantly inhibited human trophoblast cell proliferation by arresting the cell cycle at the S phase. This inhibitory effect is
mediated via AhR activation. These ﬁndings suggest that AhR might play
a critical role in mediating trophoblast functions, particularly in the cell
proliferation. Thus, ITE can potentially be used for therapeutic intervention
of human placental choriocarcinoma.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A33

P1.36

P1.37

NOTCH-DEPENDENT RBPJk IS A CRUCIAL TRANSCRIPTION
FACTOR IN TROPHOBLAST INVASION

GCM1 ALTERS THE DIFFERENTIATION PATTERN OF EQUINE
CHORIONIC GIRDLE TROPHOBLAST CELLS

Philipp Velicky, Jürgen Pollheimer, Sandra Haider, Martin Knöﬂer
Department of Obstetrics and Fetal-Maternal Medicine, Reproductive
Biology Unit, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

Victoria Cabrera-Sharp1, Abbe Martyn1, Doug Antczak2, Amanda de
Mestre1
1
Royal Veterinary College, London, UK, 2Baker Institute, Cornell University,
New York, USA

Objective: Canonical Notch signalling is fundamental in cell fate decision
and differentiation of several cell types and has recently been shown to
play a critical role in murine trophoblast invasion and vessel remodelling.
However, the role of this conserved pathway and its central transcription
factor, Recombining Binding Protein-Jk (RBPJk), in differentiation and
biological function of invasive human trophoblasts has not been elucidated. Hence, placental distribution pattern of RBPJk and its co-activators,
the Mastermind-like proteins (MAMLs), as well as the role of RBPJk in
trophoblast proliferation and invasion was investigated.
Methods: To study expression and distribution of RBPJk and MAMLs in
different trophoblast subtypes, immunoﬂuorescence of ﬁrst trimester
human placentae and decidual tissues were performed. Gene silencing of
RBPJk was accomplished in trophoblastic SGHPL-5 cells after transfection
of siRNA. Protein and mRNA were isolated from cultures and analyzed
by Western blotting and quantitative RT-PCR, respectively. Fibronectincoated transwells were used in invasion assays. Proliferation was
measured by analyzing cumulative cell numbers.
Results: Immunoﬂuorescence of tissues revealed ubiquitous expression of
RBPJk in decidual cells and all trophoblast subtypes except the syncytium.
Similarly, MAML 2 and MAML3 were present in villous and extravillous
cytotrophoblasts but decreased during trophoblast cell fusion. MAML1 was
less detectable in placenta and decidua. Lipofection of siRNA against RBPJk
completely abolished its protein expression within 16 hours. Even 5 days
after treatment RBPJk remained undetectable suggesting efﬁcient,
long-term gene silencing. Realtime-time PCR revealed changes in mRNA
expression of the canonical Notch target HES1 upon RBPJk gene silencing.
Compared to controls, invasion of RBPJk knock-down cells decreased to
40%, but proliferation was not affected.
Conclusion: Ubiquitous expression of RBPJk and MAML proteins in cytotrophoblasts suggest that Notch signalling could play a role in trophoblast
maintenance and differentiation into the invasive lineage, whereas downregulation of these proteins could promote syncytialization. Furthermore,
RBPJk has been identiﬁed as a novel, positive regulator of trophoblast
invasion.

Objectives: Around day 30-31 of equine pregnancy, rapidly proliferating
uninucleate trophoblast cells of the chorionic girdle begin to differentiate
into specialised binucleate cells. Similarly to human syncytiotrophoblast
cells, equine binucleate trophoblast cells secrete Chorionic Gonadotrophin
(CG) and, in the horse, this is dependent on binucleate trophoblast
differentiation. We recently showed the transcription factor Glial Cells
Missing 1 (GCM1) is rapidly induced in vivo during differentiation of
equine binucleate trophoblast. The aim of this study was to determine
GCM1 function during in vitro differentiation of binucleate trophoblast.
Methods: Pure populations of chorionic girdle trophoblast cells were
isolated from day 31-35 equine conceptuses. To induce GCM1 expression,
cells were grown in the presence/absence of 25-100 mM forskolin (0.02%
DMSO) for up to 72h. Differentiation was determined following labelling of
the cells with CellTraceÔ BODIPYÒ TR methyl ester and the nuclear stain
Hoeschst. The number of uni-, bi- and multinucleated cells was quantiﬁed
in 5 randomly selected ﬁelds under an inverted ﬂuorescent microscope.
GCM1 and eCGb mRNA expression was determined by qRT-PCR. The
concentration of eCG was determined using an eCG enzyme linked
immunoassay.
Results: In contrast to untreated/vehicle treated cells, qRT-PCR experiments conﬁrmed an induction of both GCM1 and eCGb mRNA at higher
concentrations of forskolin treatment (75-100 mM), despite a total absence
of eCG secretion determined by immunoassay. Forskolin signiﬁcantly
decreased total cell number at 50mM (p<0.05), 75 and 100mM (p<0.001)
and resulted in a 4-fold increase (p<0.01) in multinucleated cells. In
contrast to the heterogenous population of uni- and binucleate cells in
control cells, forskolin induced differentiation that occurred either directly
around the edge of a uninucleate cluster (25mM) or in discrete zones
(50mM).
Conclusion: In conclusion, forskolin treatment induced GCM1 mRNA
expression, either inhibited cell proliferation or promoted cell apoptosis
and resulted in an altered differentiation pattern of equine chorionic girdle
trophoblast cells.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A34

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.38

P1.39

DETECTION AND ANALYSIS OF THE ROLE OF GALECTINS IN
TROPHOBLAST FUNCTION, DIFFERENTIATION AND SIGNAL
TRANSDUCTION

KISSPEPTIN INHIBITS CELL MIGRATION IN HUMAN
TROPHOBLASTS VIA GPR54

Udo Jeschke1, Sabine Heublein1, Isabelle Fischer1, Sebastian Redel1, Klaus
Friese1, Doris Mayr2, Udo Markert3
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Pathology, Ludwig
Maximilians University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Friedrich Schiller University of Jena, Jena,
Germany
Objectives: Galectins are lectins with the ability to bind b-galactosides
through a conserved carbohydrate recognition domain. Galectins exert
their biological effects by binding galactose containing glycan ligands on
proteins involved in cell adhesion and growth regulation. Within this
study we investigated the expression and function of galectins in normal,
abortive, preeclamptic and HELLP placental tissue. In addition, in vitro
fusion and signal transduction experiments were performed.
Methods: Frozen and parafﬁn embedded placental tissue of patients with
single and recurrent abortion, preeclamptic patients, HELLP patients and
normal ﬁrst trimester and term placentas were obtained from the
Department of Obst. & Gyn. and used for this study. For immunohistochemical analyses, tissue slides were incubated with monoclonal and
polyclonal antibodies against gal-1, gal-2, gal-3, gal-4, gal-7,gal-8, gal-9,
gal-10 and gal-12. The mRNA was isolated from frozen material and realtime RT-PCR was performed for quantiﬁcation of the same set of galectins. The role of gal-1 in trophoblast cell fusion and signal transduction was
analysed by immunocytochemistry and phosphorylation array technology.
Results: Gal-1 and gal-3 were up regulated EVT in preeclamptic placentas.
Gal-1 is signiﬁcantly up regulated in decidual tissue of preeclamptic
placentas and villous trophoblast of HELLP placentas. Gal-1 and gal-9
expression is upregulated and gal-2 expression is down regulated in
abortive decidual tissue. Gal-2, gal-4, gal-7, gal-10 and gal-12 are downregulated in abortive syncytiotrophoblast. Gal-1 stimulates the syncytium
formation in choriocarcinoma cells BeWo and primary trophoblast cells
in vitro. In addition, gal-1 inﬂuenced the activity of receptor tyrosine
kinases and mitogen-activated protein kinases in BeWo cells in vitro.
Conclusion: A total of 9 human galectins as galactose binding lectins were
investigated in this study and were found to be expressed in human
placental tissue. In addition, we demonstrated that gal-1 induces cell
differentiation processes on BeWo cells, including RTKs

Victor Alexander Francis Hoste, Mushi Matjila, Robert P. Millar, Arieh A.
Katz
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, Western Cape, South Africa
Objectives: To determine the signalling pathways and gene expression
induced by Kisspeptin (KP) and its receptor GPR54 in ﬁrst trimester human
trophoblast primary cultures.
Methods: Trophoblasts were isolated from ﬁrst trimester elective terminations using a Percoll gradient. RNA was extracted using TRIZOL
(Invitrogen). Transcript expression was determined by real-time PCR (RTPCR). Protein expression was assessed by Immunocytochemistry (ICC) and
Western Blot. Receptor activity was determined by Inositol Phosphate (IP)
assay. Wound-healing assay was performed to assess migration capacity.
Results: Trophoblasts were isolated and expression of Cytokeratin-7,
a positive marker of trophoblasts, was determined by ICC. Trophoblasts
express higher amounts of GPR54 than the immortalized trophoblast cell
line HTR8SVneo. When treated with KP, ERK1/2 becomes phosphorylated.
This demonstrates that the receptor can be activated. Surprisingly, no IP
response was observed. Treatment of trophoblasts with KP reduces the
ability of these cells to migrate in a wound-healing assay. Employing
RT-PCR we have determined that KP treatment reduces the expression of
Matrix Metalloproteinase (MMP) 3, 9 and 10 and it increases expression of
Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase (TIMP) 1 and 3. ERK1/2 phosphorylation, migration and gene expression regulation are speciﬁc to GPR54,
given that treatment with p356, a GPR54 antagonist, can revert all of these
effects.
Conclusion: These results conﬁrm that KP can inhibit trophoblast migration and demonstrate that primary cultures of placenta are the best model
to study the molecular mechanisms underlying trophoblast invasion. We
plan to perform a microarray to discover new genes regulated by KP
treatment in trophoblasts.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A35

P1.40

P1.41

THE EXPRESSION OF HISTONE VARAINT H2AFZ IN THE
DEVELOPING MOUSE PLACENTA

SYNCYTIAL FORMATION REDUCES EXOSOME DEPORTATION
FROM TROPHOBLAST CELLS

Georgia Kafer1,2, Sigrid Lehnert2, Marie Pantaleon1, Peter Kaye1, David
Simmons1
1
The School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Brisbane, Australia, 2Livestock Industries, CSIRO, St Lucia, Brisbane,
Australia

Carlos Salomon1,2, Luis Sobrevia1,2, Murray Mitchell1, Gregory Rice1
1
University of Queensland Center for Clinical Research, Brisbane/Queensland, Australia, 2Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago/metropolitana, Chile

Objectives: The dynamic incorporation and expulsion of histone variants
from chromatin along with chromatin remodeler activity can establish
both permissive and repressive chromatin environments. The role of
histone variant H2afz in this phenomenon is particularly interesting due to
its localisation at both transcriptional start sites and in heterochromatin.
This implies that H2afz is a master controller of chromatin mediated
transcriptional regulation and assists in mediating cell plasticity. Interestingly, in mouse blastocysts, H2afz is present only in the trophectoderm
and to date; the potential role of H2afz in the extra-embryonic tissue
development has not been investigated. We aimed to investigate the
expression of H2afz during mouse placentation, hypothesising that H2afz is
limited to uncommitted trophoblast cells and may be involved in
controlling trophoblast differentiation.
Methods: To investigate H2afz expression in vivo, we performed in situ
hybridizations with DIG-labelled H2afz probes on mouse placental
sections ranging from embryonic day (E)6.5 to E18.5. To investigate the
expression patterns of H2afz during trophoblast differentiation in vitro,
qRT-PCR and western immunoblotting was performed on undifferentiated
and differentiating trophoblast stem (TS) cells.
Results: In situ hybridizations showed that H2afz was widely expressed in
proliferating, progenitor cell populations within the ecto-placental cone
and chorion (E7.5 – E10.5). As mouse placentation continued, H2afz
became restricted to the labyrinth in small clusters of cells that did not
exhibit any morphological characteristics of committed trophoblast
cells (E14.5 to E18.5) (n3). qRT-PCR revealed H2afz was expressed in
undifferentiated TS cells in vitro and that levels declined following differentiation (ANOVA, P<0.05, n3). Western immunoblotting conﬁrmed
these results (qualitative data, n3).
Conclusion: This study is the ﬁrst to demonstrate that H2afz is expressed
in the mouse placenta and is limited to progenitor-like trophoblast cells.
This data lends support to the hypothesis that H2afz may be involved in
the control of differentiation in mouse placentation.

Objective: Exosomes are released from human trophoblast cells and are
involved in diverse biological functions, such as cell-cell communication,
immunological response and carry a variety of proteins as mRNA and
microRNA. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of syncytial
formation on the release of exosomes from trophoblast cells.
Methods: An in vitro, two–sample cell culture cells experimental design
was used to characterize the release of exosomes from trophoblast cells.
Trophoblast cells were puriﬁed from term placenta (n¼2) using a trypsindeoxyribonuclease-dispase/Percoll method and characterized by speciﬁc
markers anticytokeratin-7 and antivimentin. Trophoblast cells were
cultured (in duplicate) for 4 days (DMEM, 1% FCS 5% CO2 in T75 ﬂasks) and
10 days for syncytiotrophoblast. Cells were washed and then incubated in
FCS-free medium for 48 hours. The supernatant was collected and exosomes were isolated using a commercially available kit (ExoQuickÔ,
System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA) according to manufacturers
instructions and characterized by ﬂow cytometry and Western blot using
exosome markers (CD63, CD81 and CD9). Finally, the exosome pellet was
resuspended in RIPA buffer and protein content determined. Exosome
release was expressed as the ratio of exosomal protein/total cell protein.
Result: The protein content of the exosomes determined by ﬂow cytometry and Western blot showed a positive population and the presence of
CD63, CD81 and CD9, respectively. The release of exosomes from trophoblast cells incubated in vitro was 626-mg/48 h. Following syncytialisation,
exosome release was 115 mg/48 h. When normalized for total cell protein,
exosome release was 3.6 fold higher in trophoblast cells than following
syncytialisation.
Conclusions: The role of exosomes during normal and pathological
pregnancies has yet to be clearly established, however, it is tempting
to speculate that during normal pregnancy the syncytium limits the
deportation of exosomes that may cause maternal endothelial cell damage.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A36

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.42

P1.43

REGULATION OF CHORIONIC GIRDLE TROPHOBLAST
DIFFERENTIATION BY TGFb SIGNALLING PATHWAYS

DOES PHOSPHOLIPID SCRAMBLASE 1 PLAY A ROLE IN VILLOUS
TROPHOBLAST FUSION?

Victoria Cabrera-Sharp1, Stephanie Richardson1, Donald Miller2, Douglas
Antczak2, Abir Mukherjee1, Amanda de Mestre1
1
The Royal Veterinary College, London, UK, 2Cornell University, Ithaca, NY,
USA

Veronika M. Berghold, Martin Gauster, Gerit Moser, Monika Siwetz,
Monika Sundl, Berthold Huppertz
Institute of Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology, Medical University of
Graz, Graz, Austria

Objectives: The chorionic girdle (CG) is a discrete annular structure of the
early equine conceptus that gives rise to the endometrial cups. Beginning
at around day 31 of pregnancy, the rapidly proliferating trophoblast cells of
the CG terminally differentiate into eCG-secreting binucleate trophoblast.
This study investigated the role of TGFb signalling molecules in terminal
differentiation of binucleate trophoblast.
Methods: CG and chorion tissue was isolated from day 30 to 35 equine
conceptuses by established methods. A 44K gene probe equine expression
array and RT-PCR was used to compare Type I and Type II serine/threonine
kinase and accessory receptor expression between Day 34 CG and chorion
tissue. Cultured CG cells were supplemented with 1-100 ng/ml human
BMP4 or PBS/BSA as a control for up to 10 days. Differentiation was
determined following labelling of the cells with CellTraceÔ BODIPYÒ TR
methyl ester and the nuclear stain Hoeschst. The number of uni-, bi- and
multinucleated cells was quantiﬁed in 5 randomly selected ﬁelds under
an inverted ﬂuorescent microscope. The concentration of eCG was
determined using an enzyme linked immunoassay.
Results: TGFb receptor expression in the CG was tightly regulated. CG
preferentially expressed Type I, Type II and accessory receptors, Bone
Morphogenetic Protein Receptor Type 1A (ALK3), Bone Morphogenetic
Protein Receptor 2 (BMPR-II), Dragon and Bambi that bind the ligand
BMP4. ALK1, ALK5, ALK6, ActRIIB, endoglin and betaglycan mRNA was not
detected in the CG. Stimulation of chorionic girdle cells with 1-100 ng/ml
BMP4 for 4 days resulted in up to a 2-fold increase in percentage of
binucleate cells (p<0.001). Furthermore, stimulation of cultured CG cells
with BMP4 for 10 days resulted in an increase in eCG concentration.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings support a role for TGFb signalling in regulation of
chorionic girdle differentiation via BMP4 binding to BMPR-II, ALK3, Dragon
and Bambi.

Objectives: Villous cytotrophoblast fusion with the overlying syncytiotrophoblast layer is thoroughly coordinated by a set of factors. One of the
crucial aspects for successful fusion is the transient deregulation of regular
membrane asymmetry leading to externalization of phosphatidylserine
to the outer membrane leaﬂet. Initial studies revealed phospholipid
scramblase 1 (PLSCR1) to be the strongest expressed enzyme among all
transporters involved in regulation of membrane architecture in the
trophoblast. The aims of this study were to analyze the spatio-temporal
expression of PLSCR1 in the placenta and to further elucidate its putative
role in syncytialization.
Methods: Immunostaining for PLSCR1 was performed using placental
tissues of different gestational ages and the trophoblast fusion model
BeWo. Expression of PLSCR1 was analyzed in BeWo cells by Western Blot
and qPCR. RNA interference approach and an inhibitor for scramblases
(R5421, ethaninidothioic acid) were used to deﬁne the functional role of
PLSCR1 in forskolin induced BeWo cell fusion. Fusion efﬁciency was
evaluated and correlated with beta-hCG.
Results: While PLSCR1 was strongly expressed in syncytiotrophoblast,
only slight staining was detected in villous cytotrophoblasts. In BeWo cells
no signiﬁcant changes in PLSCR1 mRNA and protein expression were
observed during cell fusion. At the same time, a subset of speciﬁc BeWo
syncytia showed double immunostaining for beta-hCG and PLSCR1. Incubation with scramblase inhibitor R5421 or siRNA mediated knockdown of
PLSCR1 had no signiﬁcant effect on forskolin induced beta-hCG secretion
and fusion of BeWo cells.
Conclusion: Although PLSCR1 is located at the right place, i.e. the villous
trophoblast, cell culture experiments so far do not support a direct
involvement of PLSCR1 in trophoblast fusion. However, we cannot exclude
a role of PLSCR1 in the fusion process since it may well be effective on the
syncytial rather than the cytotrophoblast side of the fusion process.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.44

P1.45

ROLE OF MAPKS PATHWAY IN TROPHOBLAST
DIFFERENTIATION REGULATED BY HYPOXIA OR PPAR

IS SYSTEM ASC OR SYSTEM XC- MEDIATING GLUTAMATE
EXCHANGE ACROSS THE HUMAN PLACENTAL
SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST INTO THE FETAL CIRCULATION?

Georges Daoud
American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon
OBJECTIVES, METHODS, RESULTS, CONCLUSION
Objectives: A successful mammalian pregnancy depends on two major
steps in placental development that are related to trophoblast differentiation. First, the differentiation of extravillous cytotrophoblast, responsible
for the invasion of maternal uterine stroma. Second, the increased level of
maternal blood ﬂow to the placenta is associated with increased nutrients,
gazes and waste exchange between the mother and the foetus. This latter
function is associated with the differentiation of speciﬁc structure: the
syncytiotrophblast (STB) which arises through the differentiation and
fusion of the relatively undifferentiated mitotically active villous
cytotrophoblast (CTB). Mechanisms that control syncytiotrophoblast
differentiation are still poorly understood. We have previously shown the
implication of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) and Src family
kinases (SFK) in trophoblast differentiation. Moreover, we and others
showed that hypoxia and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR) pathways play a critical role in trophoblast differentiation. The aim
of this study is to elucidate the implication of MAPKs pathways in the
regulation of trophoblast differentiation either by hypoxia or PPAR ligands.
Methods: To address this, we are using a placental cell line (BeWo) capable
of differentiating from a CTB phenotype to a STB phenotype in vitro. The
role of MAPK pathway will be evaluated using speciﬁc MAPK inhibitors,
transfection assays, SiRNA and reporter assays.
Results: These experiments are underway now and our preliminary data
suggest that ERK and p38 modulate how hypoxia and PPAR regulate
trophoblast differentiation.
Conclusion: The accomplishment of this work has implication in
pregnancy related diseases such as pre-eclampsia and intra uterine growth
retardation (IUGR).

A37

Emma Field, Jane Cleal, Suzanne Brooks, Mark Hanson, Kirsten Poore,
Rohan Lewis
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
Objectives: Glutamate concentrations within the placental syncytiotrophoblast are high at around 5 mmol/l but the role of this glutamate
within the cell is uncertain. Glutamate efﬂux from the syncytiotrophoblast
has been observed but the mechanism behind this is unclear. This study
aimed to investigate whether glutamate efﬂux from the syncytiotrophoblast is mediated by amino acid exchange transporters.
Methods: Ethical approval for this study was granted by the Southampton
and Southwest Hampshire Regional Ethics Committee. Human placentas
were collected following uncomplicated term pregnancies. Isolated
perfused human cotyledons (n ¼ 10) were perfused with Earle’s bicarbonate buffer. 3H-proline, 14C-glutamate and 1.8 mM creatinine were
perfused into the maternal arterial circulation. Boluses (16 mmol) of
glutamate, aspartate, alanine, serine and N-acetylcysteine (NAC) were
injected into the fetal circulation to stimulate exchange. A 0.1 mol maternal
bolus of NAC was also administered. Radioactivity in maternal and fetal
venous samples collected were determined via liquid scintillation counting and creatinine levels were determined using an enzymatic assay.
Western Blotting (n ¼ 5 blots, 45 mg basal membrane (BM) and microvillous membrane (MVM) protein) and PCR was used to identify whether
Xc- is expressed on the BM or MVM.
Results: In the fetal circulation, a bolus of glutamate stimulated release of
glutamate but not proline. No other substrates stimulated release of
glutamate or proline in the fetal circulation. In the maternal circulation the
bolus of NAC stimulated release of glutamate from the placenta consistent
with activity of the amino acid exchanger Xc-.
Conclusion: This study demonstrated amino acid exchange for glutamate,
but not for proline, in both the maternal and fetal circulations. Exchange
into the maternal circulation is likely to be mediated via Xc-. These results
suggest that a high concentration of glutamate in the placenta creates
a gradient driving cystine uptake for glutathione synthesis.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A38

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.46

P1.47

TRANSPLACENTAL TRANSFER OF URIC ACID

PLACENTAL TAURINE TRANSPORT IS REDUCED IN FIRST
TRIMESTER IN WOMEN WITH RAISED BMI

ichiro uehara1, sinji tanigaki1, toru kimura2, keiji sakai1, hiroyuki sakurai2,
mitsutoshi iwashita1
1
Kyorin University School of Medicine Obstetrics and Gynecology, MITAKA,TOKYO, Japan, 2Kyorin University School of Medicine Phamacolcogy,
MITAKA, TOKYO, Japan
Objectives: Serum uric acid (UA) concentrations are grossly elevated in
pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH) and twin pregnancy. Hyperuricemia is one of the characteristic ﬁndings in PIH. In clinical practice, UA
determination is considered to be a part of the course in women with PIH
to monitor disease severity and aid management of these women.
However, UA handling in placenta has not been extensively evaluated.
Methods: UA levels of maternal blood, umbilical venous and arterial blood
on cesarean section in 50 normal singleton pregnancies, 21 twin pregnancies, and 13 singleton pregnancies with PIH were measured. Primary
cultured trophoblasts were established from the villous tissues from
patients underwent legal, elective termination of pregnancy. All patients
gave informed consent for collection and investigational use of tissues.
This study protocol was approved by ethics committee of Kyorin University. To clarify transportation of UA in placenta, RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and [14C] UA uptake of p cultured trophoblasts and BeWo cells
were performed.
Results: UA levels were virtually identical among maternal blood, umbilical artery and vein, suggesting that UA can pass through blood placental
barrier. Among possible UA transporters, OAT4, OAT10, URATv1, and
ABCG2 were identiﬁed in placenta by both RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. Surprisingly, [14C]UA was not taken up in primary trophoblasts
and BeWo cells, which expressed same sets of UA transporters in placenta,
To clarify paracellular transport of UA via basolateral and apical transport,
BeWo monolayers were utilized. BeWo monolayers showed that [14C]UA,
was transported bidirectionally at 4 C to basolateral and apical side using
double chamber system.
Conclusions: Taken together, there was no active transport of UA in
trophoblasts and BeWo cells. These data suggest that there was no active
transport of UA in trophoblasts and BeWo cells, and that paracellular route
is a major pathway of UA across blood placental barrier.

Claire Pegorie, Susan Greenwood, Michelle Desforges
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Objectives: The prevalence of maternal obesity is rising and increases the
risk of pre-eclampsia, stillbirth and abnormal fetal growth. These
complications are associated with altered placental development and
function. Syncytiotrophoblast taurine transporter (TauT) activity is lower
in women with raised body mass index (BMI) than women of ideal weight
at term (Ditchﬁeld et al 2010). In vitro knockdown of TauT in trophoblast
cells compromises their differentiation (Parsons et al 2009) and increases
cytokine-induced apoptosis (Desforges et al 2010). It is possible that
reduced syncytiotrophoblast TauT activity in early gestation links raised
BMI to placental pathology. We tested the hypothesis that syncytiotrophoblast TauT activity and expression is reduced in women with raised
BMI in the ﬁrst trimester.
Methods: Placentas were collected from elective medical or surgical
terminations of pregnancy (7-12 weeks gestation) and women grouped as
ideal weight (BMI 18.5-24.9), overweight (25-29.9) or obese (>30).
Syncytiotrophoblast TauT activity was measured as Naþ-dependent uptake
of 3H-taurine into villous fragments over 90minutes at 37C. TauT protein
intensity in syncytiotrophoblast was scored by two independent blinded
observers following detection by immunohistochemistry.
Results: TauT activity in ideal weight (n¼3), overweight (n¼3), and obese
(n¼4) women was 2984-4572, 1787-2474, 1208-2291 fmol/mg protein/
90min respectively. TauT activity was signiﬁcantly lower in obese than
ideal weight women (p<0.05, Kruskal-Wallis; Dunn’s post hoc test),
negatively related to maternal BMI (Figure 1), but unaffected by gestation.
Comparison of syncytiotrophoblast TauT staining intensity in ideal
weight (n¼20), overweight (n¼10) and obese women (n¼11) revealed no
signiﬁcant difference.

ĂConclusion: Raised maternal BMI is associated with reduced placental
TauT activity, but not expression, in the ﬁrst trimester. This could increase
syncytiotrophoblast susceptibility to damage by inﬂammatory cytokines
that are elevated in maternal obesity, predisposing to development of
pathology as pregnancy progresses. The cause of reduced placental TauT
activity in maternal obesity requires further investigation.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.48

P1.49

CHARACTERIZATION OF SODIUM DEPENDENT BETAINE
UPTAKE IN HUMAN PLACENTAL BRUSH-BORDER MEMBRANES

EXAMINING THE ROLE OF SLC10A3 IN THE PLACENTA

1

1

1

1

Hiromi Eguchi , Masatoshi Tomi , Tomohiro Nishimura , kenji Oda , Mai
Yamazaki1, Risa Yagi1, Mariko Usuda1, Kei Higuchi1,2, Tetsuo Maruyama3,
Emi Nakashima1
1
Keio University Faculty of Pharmacy, Tokyo, Japan, 2Teikyo University
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan, 3Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: The principal physiological role of betaine is as an osmolyte
and methyl donor and thereby helps to protect fetus and placenta against
osmotic stress and hypomethylation. The uptake system of betaine from
the maternal blood in placental brush-border membranes is a key step for
supplying betaine to the fetus. The purpose of this study is to clarify the
transport mechanism of betaine in human placental brush-border
membranes.
Methods: Brush-border membrane vesicles (BBMVs) were isolated from
human term placenta using magnesium precipitation technique. The
uptake of [14C]betaine was characterized using human placental BBMVs
and rat placental TR-TBT 18d-1 cells. The protein expression level in cells
was evaluated by western blot and immunocytochemical analyses.
Results: A transient overshoot phenomenon of [14C]betaine uptake by
human placental BBMVs was observed in the presence of inwardly
directed gradients of sodium, suggesting the presence of sodiumdependent betaine uptake process(es). The uptake of [14C]betaine by
TR-TBT 18d-1 cells was signiﬁcantly inhibited by 2-methylaminoisobutyric
acid (MeAIB), a speciﬁc substrate of system A sodium-dependent neutral
amino acid transporters (SNAT), but not by GABA, a substrate of sodiumdependent betaine/GABA transporter (BGT)-1/SLC6A12. Enhanced
expression of SNAT2/SLC38A2 protein under hypertonic conditions was
observed in TR-TBT 18d-1 cells and was accompanied by an increase in
the MeAIB-sensitive uptake of [14C]betaine. The initial uptake rate of [14C]
betaine in human SNAT2-tranfected cells was greater than that in
mock-transfected cells.
Conclusion: Human SNAT2 recognizes betaine as a substrate and appears
to be involved in osmosensitive transport of betaine in placental
brush-border membranes.

A39

Tomohiro Tawara1, Tomohiro Nishimura1, Masatoshi Tomi1, Mai Yamazaki1,
Rina Matsushita1, Kei Higuchi1,2, Tetsuo Maruyama3, Emi Nakashima1
1
Keio University Faculty of Pharmacy, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan, 2Teikyo
University School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, Japan,
3
Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: SLC10A3 is an orphan transporter belonging to sodium/bile
acid cotransporter (SLC10A) family. The observation that SLC10A3 is most
abundantly expressed in the placenta warrants vigorous investigation
on placental SLC10A3 for better understanding of its potential role. The
purpose of this study is to examine the cellular and subcellular localizations and function of SLC10A3.
Methods: Placental brush-border membranes were isolated from human
term and rat GD19 placenta by magnesium precipitation technique and
subjected immunoblot analysis. Rat Slc10a3-transfected cells were used for
examining taurocholic acid (TCA) uptake activity and subcellular localization of Slc10a3. The cellular localization of Slc10a3 was determined by
immunohistochemical analysis using rat placental frozen sections.
Results: SLC10A3 protein was detected in human and rat placental
homogenate, but the expression level of SLC10A3 protein in placental
brush-border membranes was low compared with placental homogenate.
In rat placental sections, immunostaining of Slc10a3 was observed in the
trophoblast layer close to that of P-glycoprotein, which is known to be
expressed in the brush-border membrane of the syncytiotrophoblast, but
not overlapped that of CD31, an endothelial cell marker. In rat Slc10a3transfected cells, Slc10a3 immunoreactivity was intense at the cytoplasm
and colocalized with mitochondria and ER markers, but present to a lesser
extent at the plasma membrane. No signal was seen in the mocktransfected cells. Rat Slc10a3-transfected cells exhibited no signiﬁcant
increase in TCA uptake compared to mock-transfected cells.
Conclusion: Placental SLC10A3 appears to be localized in the trophoblast
layer, except for its brush-border membrane. SLC10A3 appears to be
distributed mainly in intracellular compartments rather than plasma
membranes, which might cause no signiﬁcant effect on cellular uptake of
bile acids.

Reference
Nishimura et al., Placenta 31, 1003-1009 (2010).

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A40

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.50

P1.51

ROLE OF ORGANIC ANION TRANSPORTER (OAT) 4 ON ESTRIOL
SYNTHESIS IN THE PLACENTAL SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLASTS

INCREASED PLACENTAL NITRATION IS ASSOCIATED WITH
REDUCED TAURINE TRANSPORTER ACTIVITY

Masatoshi Tomi1, Mayuko Ozaki1, Sachika Nishimura1, Kei Higuchi1,2,
Tomohiro Nishimura1, Emi Nakashima1
1
Keio University Faculty of Pharmacy, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan, 2Teikyo
University School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Chloe Hirst, Susan Greenwood, Michelle Desforges
The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

Objectives: Estriol (E3) is synthesized from fetal-derived 16a-hydroxy
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (16a-OH DHEAS) in the syncytiotrophoblast constituting the placental barrier. Therefore, placental syncytiotrophoblasts must be equipped with 16a-OH DHEAS transporter(s) at the
basolateral (fetal side) membrane for E3 synthesis. The purpose of this
study is to clarify transporter mechanism of 16a-OH DHEAS at the
basolateral membrane of the placental syncytiotrophoblasts.
Methods: [3H]16a-OH DHEAS was converted from [3H]DHEAS using
recombinant human CYP3A7 and subjected to the cellular uptake study.
The secretion of E3 from cells was measured by ELISA.
Results: The uptake of [3H]16a-OH DHEAS by forskolin-induced differentiated JEG-3 human choriocarcinoma cells, used as model cells of the
placental syncytiotrophoblasts, was signiﬁcantly inhibited by 1 mM
DHEAS, estrone sulfate (E1S), and bromosulfophthalein (BSP), but not by
tetraethylammonium (TEA), suggesting the involvement of organic anion
transport system on 16a-OH DHEAS uptake. The secretion of E3 from
differentiated JEG-3 cells was detected by incubating with 16a-OH DHEAS
for 8 hrs but is also inhibited by co-incubating with 50 mM BSP. Organic
anion transporter (OAT) 4 (SLC22A11) and organic anion transporting
polypeptide (OATP) 2B1 are known to be present at the basolateral
membrane of the placental syncytiotrophoblasts. Human OAT4transfected COS-7 cells exhibited [3H]16a-OH DHEAS uptake activity
with a Km of 7.4 mM, and moreover, this uptake was also inhibited by
DHEAS, E1S, and BSP, but not by TEA. On the other hand, the OATP2B1mediated uptake of [3H]16a-OH DHEAS was not observed.
Conclusion: OAT4 appears to play a principal role in the uptake of 16a-OH
DHEAS and contribute to the E3 synthesis during pregnancy.

Objectives: Pre-eclampsia (PE) is associated with increased nitrative
stress, abnormal syncytiotrophoblast renewal and fetal growth
restriction. We have shown that syncytiotrophoblast taurine
transporter (TauT) activity is signiﬁcantly lower in PE than normal
pregnancy (NP) (1). Nitrative stress alters protein function by nitration of tyrosine residues. We propose that post-translational modiﬁcation of TauT through tyrosine nitration could down-regulate
transporter activity in PE. We tested the hypothesis that nitration is
higher in PE placentas, previously shown to have reduced TauT
activity, than in NP and inducing placental nitrative stress reduces
TauT activity.
Methods: Placentas were collected from NP and PE (blood pressure
>140/90mmHg after 20 weeks gestation in previously normotensive
women plus proteinuria >300 mg/L in a 24-hour collection). Syncytiotrophoblast nitrotyrosine was detected by immunohistochemistry
and staining intensity scored by two independent blinded observers.
Nitrative stress was induced in vitro by treating placental villous
explants from NP with SIN-1 (1mM), a generator of nitrative stress, for
48 hours. Syncytiotrophoblast nitrotyrosine staining intensity was
greater following SIN-1 treatment than in untreated controls, conﬁrming induction of nitrative stress. TauT activity was measured as
initial rate Naþ-dependent 3H-taurine uptake into treated and control
explants.
Results: In the PE placentas previously shown to have reduced TauT
activity (1), intensity of syncytiotrophoblast nitrotyrosine staining was
greater than in NP (Figure 1a). SIN-1 signiﬁcantly reduced syncytiotrophoblast TauT activity compared to the corresponding control
(Figure 1b).

Ă

Conclusion: Induction of nitrative stress with SIN-1 signiﬁcantly reduced
placental TauT activity. Initial studies suggest that syncytiotrophoblast
nitrotyrosine is greater in PE than NP and nitration of TauT could downregulate activity in PE. In vitro knockdown of TauT activity in trophoblast
inhibits syncytialisation (2) and reduced TauT activity by nitration could
contribute to abnormal syncytiotrophoblast renewal in PE.

(1) Hirst et al (2012) Reprod Sci 19:377A.
(2) Parsons et al (2009) Placenta 30:A83.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A41

P1.52

P1.53

GESTATIONAL DIABETES, TNF-a AND LEPTIN AFFECT FOLIC
ACID UPTAKE BY THE HUMAN SYNCTYTIOTROPHOBLAST:
EVIDENCE FOR JAK/STAT SIGNALLING INVOLVEMENT

GESTATIONAL DIABETES MELLITUS REDUCES PLACENTAL
UPTAKE OF LONG-CHAIN POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS
AND INTERFERES WITH TROPHOBLAST DEVELOPMENT

Ana Correia-Branco1, João R Araujo1, Liliana Moreira1, Carla Ramalho1,2,
Fátima Martel1, Elisa Keating1,2
1
Department of Biochemistry (U38-FCT), Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Centro
Hospitalar S. João, Porto, Portugal

João R Araújo1, Ana Correia-Branco1, Carla Ramalho1,2, Elisa Keating1,
Fátima Martel1
1
Department of Biochemistry (U38-FCT), Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Centro
Hospitalar S. João, Porto, Portugal

Objectives: The objectives of this work were to investigate the effect of
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) upon folic acid (FA) placental transport and to identify speciﬁc GDM molecular hallmarks that may interfere
with this process.
Methods: We compared 3H-FA uptake by human cytotrophoblasts isolated
from normal and GDM pregnancies (NTB and DTB cells, respectively) and
investigated the effect of GDM-associated hallmarks upon 3H-FA uptake by
BeWo cells. For this, BeWo cells were exposed to different concentrations
of D-glucose, insulin, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), tumor necrosis factora (TNF-a) or leptin for 1, 4, 24, 48, or 72 h. Radioactivity in the intracellular
media was measured by liquid scintillation counting.
Results: 3H-FA uptake by NTB and DTB cells was time-dependent, acidic
pH-stimulated and inhibited by FA and its analogs. When compared to
NTB, 3H-FA uptake by DTB cells was more sensitive to acidic pH changes
and to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate and pemetrexed inhibition, indicating
a proportionally greater involvement of the proton-coupled folate transporter. A 4 h-exposure of BeWo cells to LPS (1-10 mg/ml) or to high levels of
TNF-a (300 ng/l) signiﬁcantly reduced 3H-FA uptake. Moreover, hyperleptinemic conditions (100 ng/ml leptin) decreased 3H-FA uptake by BeWo
cells in a time-dependent manner, when compared to normoleptinemic
conditions (1 ng/ml leptin). The inhibitory effect of leptin was partially
reverted by inhibition of janus kinase 2 (JAK2).
Conclusion: In conclusion, GDM modulates 3H-FA uptake by the syncytiotrophoblast, and leptin, via JAK/STAT (signal transducers and activators
of transcription) signaling, as well as TNF-a downregulate 3H-FA uptake by
BeWo cells.
Supported by FCT, COMPETE, QREN and FEDER (PTDC/SAU-OSM/102239/
2008, SFRH/BD/63086/2009 and SFRH/BPD/40170/2007).

Objectives: The objectives of this work were to investigate the effects of
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) a) upon the placental transport of the
long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFAs) arachidonic acid (AA)
and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and b) upon viability, proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis of human primary cultured cytotrophoblasts.
Methods: We investigated 14C-AA and 14C-DHA uptake by human
cytotrophoblasts isolated from normal and GDM pregnancies (NTB and
DTB cells, respectively). Radioactivity in the intracellular media was
measured by liquid scintillation counting. Additionally, we compared NTB
and DTB cell viability (by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity assay),
proliferation (by 3H-thymidine incorporation), differentiation (by alkaline
phosphatase activity assay) and apoptosis (by TUNEL assay).
Results: Uptake of 14C-AA and 14C-DHA by NTB cells was: (1) mediated by
both saturable (for lower substrate concentrations) and non-saturable
(for higher substrate concentrations) mechanisms; (2) acidic pHstimulated; (3) inhibited by long-chain fatty acids (with LC-PUFAs
having a higher potency); and (4) strongly inhibited by the long-chain
acyl-CoA synthetase (ACSL) inhibitor, triacsin C. When compared to NTB
cells, DTB cells showed a markedly lower capacity for 14C-AA and 14C-DHA
accumulation over time, through a decrease in both the saturable and the
non-saturable components of uptake, and this was associated with
a decrease in ACSL1 mRNA levels. Also, DTB cells showed higher turnover
rates (higher proliferation and apoptosis rates) than NTB cells. Finally,
uptake of LC-PUFAs in NTB cells was increased (by 20-25%) after shortterm exposure to TNF-a (14C-AA and 14C-DHA) and insulin (14C-DHA).
Conclusion: In conclusion, placental uptake of LC-PUFAs is markedly
decreased in GDM. This change does not seem to be accounted for isolated
hallmarks of GDM, such as increased inﬂammation or hyperinsulinemia.
Supported by FCT, COMPETE, QREN and FEDER (PTDC/SAU-OSM/102239/
2008, SFRH/BD/63086/2009 and SFRH/BPD/40170/2007).

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A42

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.54

P1.55

INTERACTION OF THE PLACENTAL BCRP TRANSPORTER WITH
ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICALS

PRE-GESTATIONAL DIABETES WITH CHORANGIOSIS AND
A NODULAR CHORANGIOMA. A CASE REPORT

Lauren Aleksunes
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA

Rekha Samuel, Satish Perumal, Alok Srivastava, Santhosh Benjamin, Jiji
Mathews
Christian Medical College, Vellore, India

Objectives: Over the last decade, the scientiﬁc community has voiced
increasing concern regarding disruption of endocrine and reproductive
systems as a consequence of in utero exposure to xenobiotics. These
endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) are quite diverse and include
plasticizers, mycotoxins, phytoestrogens, and pesticides. The breast cancer
resistance protein (BCRP) is a chemical efﬂux transporter expressed in the
human placenta that is responsible for fetal-to-maternal transport. Inhibition of the fetoprotective function of BCRP may be a mechanism involved
in the susceptibility of the developing fetus to toxicities following EDC
exposure. The purpose of this study was to characterize EDCs as potential
substrates and inhibitors of the BCRP transporter.
Methods: Two in vitro screening assays, the BCRP ATPase assay and
inverted membrane vesicle assay, were used to test interactions between
BCRP and twelve chemicals with potential for endocrine disruption:
bisphenol A, genistein, methoxychlor, prochloraz, zearalenone, tebuconazole, propiconazole, tributyltin, zeranol, myclobutanil, propargite and
epoxiconazole.
Results: Based on the ATPase assay, it was conﬁrmed that genistein is
a substrate for BCRP, while slight increases in ATP hydrolysis were
observed for tributyltin, zeranol, zearalenone, and bisphenol A, indicating
they may be possible substrates. In both assays, all twelve EDCs inhibited
BCRP transport of known substrates (sulfasalazine and lucifer yellow).
Conclusion: Genistein, tributyltin, zeranol, zearalenone and methoxychlor
were some of the most potent inhibitors of BCRP transport. Cell-based
studies are currently underway to further characterize the inhibitory
kinetics of EDCs on BCRP-mediated transport and further characterize
transport afﬁnity. These ﬁndings may assist in risk assessment of perinatal
exposure to these chemicals. Supported by ES-005022, DK-080774,
ES-020522.

Case Report: A 32-year-old known diabetic, G2P1L1, on insulin, metformin
and glyburide prior to the pregnancy, was admitted in labour at 37 weeks.
Her fasting blood and postprandial glucose values were 73mg% and 118mg
% respectively. She underwent a caesarean section for transverse lie and
delivered a full term, normal, live baby girl weighing 2.6kg with an Apgar
score of 9 and 10.There were no congenital anomalies detected.
The placenta weighed 540g, and was received intact. There were no gross
anatomical or placental lesions such as calciﬁcation, thrombi or infarcts.
The umbilical cord with the two arteries and a single vein was unremarkable. Histological examination of the placenta revealed pronounced
diffuse increase in central vascularity of villi conﬁrming a diagnosis of
chorangiosis; more than 10 capillaries per 10 terminal villi in more than
three areas viewed by a 10X objective with reticulin rich network). The
capillaries were CD31 positive. Pericytes were smooth muscle actin positive. Occasional endothelial cells were Ki67 positive. Villi were lined by
cytokeratin positive trophoblasts. Normally, chorionic villi contain ﬁve or
less vascular channels, which extends even to the same vessel present in
more than one plane of section examined. An incidental microscopic single
well-circumscribed lesion was also seen comprising conspicuous positive
capillary sized vessels highlighted by the reticulin stain embedded in
a collagenous stroma, resembling a hemangioma. CD31 positive capillaries
with surrounding perivascular smooth muscle actin positive pericytes
were present. Occasional trophoblastic cells were Ki67 positive. 1% of
endothelial cells were Ki67 positive. The nodule was lined by cytokeratin
positive trophoblasts. There was no evidence of abnormal trophoblastic
proliferation. A diagnosis of nodular chorangioma was made.
Conclusion: We report chorangiosis and microscopic nodular chorangioma coexisting in a pre-gestational diabetic term placenta. Chorangiosis and Chorangioma are examples of villous capillary lesions of the
placenta.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.56

P1.57

INVESTIGATION OF 4 CASES RAISED D DIMER(DD) AFTER
INJECT SUBCUTANEOUSLY LOW DOSE UNFRACTIONATED
HEPARIN(LDUFH) TO PREVENT VENOUS
THROMBOEMBOLISM(VTE) AFTER CAESAREAN SECTION

TUMOUR HOMING PEPTIDES AS TOOLS FOR TARGETED
DELIVERY TO THE PLACENTA

YOSHIAKI OKUMA1, TADAHIDE UESATO1,2, MAMORU TANAKA1,2, NAO
SUZUKI1,2
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kawasaki City Tama Hospital,
KAWASAKI, KANAGAWA, Japan, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St. Marianna School of Medicine, KAWASAKI, KANAGAWA, Japan
Objects: To investigate cause of rise DD on postoperative days 7th and the
efﬁcacy of LDUFH for prevent VTE in high-risk group.
Methods: To make a comparison between low-risk group and high-risk
group about inﬂuencing factors of DD on preoperative day, postoperative
day 1st, 4th 7th, patient background and clinical course in 116 cases of
Caesarean section injected LDUFH (total delivery 609 cases) from October
2010 to February 2012.
Results: The difference of variance of DD was great high-risk group than
low-risk group on postoperative days 7th. There were signiﬁcantly
different between high-risk group and low-risk group about placental
weight and birth weight. There were uncorrelation between placental
weight and time-dependent change of DD in high-risk group.
Conclusion: We could not ﬁgure out cause of rise DD on postoperative
days 7th and could not obviously show the usefulness of LDUFH. We might
be thought to be causally related to placental weight about difference of
variance of DD in high-risk group.

A43

Lynda Harris1,2, Cornelia Ndifon1, Ramana Kotamraju2, Lilach Agemy2,
Tambet Teesalu2, Erkki Ruoslahti2
1
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK, 2Sanford Burnham Medical
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA
Objectives: Tumour-speciﬁc “homing peptides” are short peptide
sequences that bind to epitopes expressed on the endothelium of tumour
vasculature, but do not bind to the vascular beds of other organs. Tumour
homing peptides have been used to target intravenously administered
drugs directly to their site of action. As the placenta behaves like a slow
growing tumour, and remodelling uterine spiral arteries exhibit a unique
vascular phenotype, we examined whether tumour homing peptides can
be exploited to target the materno-fetal interface.
Methods: A panel of T7 bacteriophage, each displaying a different tumour
homing peptide on its surface, were pooled and intravenously injected into
a pregnant mouse. After 30 minutes, and following cardiac perfusion to
remove unbound phage, the uterus and placentas were collected and
homogenized. Bound phage were titered and sequenced, to determine
whether phage bearing particular surface peptides were preferentially
enriched in these tissues. Individual synthetic peptides labelled with
5(6)-carboxyﬂuorescein (FAM), and peptide-coated iron oxide nanoworms
were utilised to validate utero-placental homing: peptides or nanoworms
were intravenously injected, and after 3 hours, multiple organs were
collected for analysis by ﬂuorescence microscopy.
Results: Phage bearing two tumour homing sequences, designated KRK
and iRGD, were enriched in uterine and placental tissue. Intravenous
injection of the synthetic peptides FAM-KRK or FAM-iRGD conﬁrmed
placental targeting; both peptides bound to the placental labyrinth and to
the endothelium of decidual spiral arteries at multiple time points in
gestation, but were not observed in other organs. Iron oxide nanoworms
coated with FAM-KRK or FAM-iRGD accumulated at the materno-fetal
interface, whereas nanoworms coated with control peptides did not.
FAM-KRK and FAM-iRGD also bound to the syncytium of human ﬁrst
trimester and term placental explants.
Conclusion: These data provide proof of principle for the use of selected
tumour homing peptides to mediate targeted delivery to the placenta.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A44

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.58

P1.59

IDENTIFICATION OF NOVEL PLACENTAL HOMING PEPTIDES

DOWNREGULATION OF LUTEINIZING HORMONE RECEPTOR
(LHR) MRNA IN THE RAT UTERUS

Lynda Harris1,2, Ramana Kotamraju2, Tambet Teesalu2, Erkki Ruoslahti2
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK, 2Sanford Burnham Medical
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA
1

Objectives: Phage display has previously been used to identify novel
peptides that bind to the vasculature of speciﬁc organs, providing the basis
for targeted drug delivery systems. To this end, we have screened a phage
library to identify novel peptide sequences that bind exclusively to the
mouse placenta.
Methods: Homogenized murine uteroplacental tissue was incubated with
a T7 bacteriophage library, which had been engineered so that each virus
particle displayed one of 1010 random peptide sequences on its surface.
After extensive washing, bound phage were titered, ampliﬁed and puriﬁed.
Following three rounds of ex vivo screening, the resulting phage pool was
intravenously injected into a pregnant mouse. Cardiac perfusion was
performed after 30 minutes to remove unbound phage, and the uterus
and placentas were collected. Bound phage were titered, ampliﬁed and
puriﬁed; four rounds of in vivo screening were performed in total. Individual clones from the second, third and fourth rounds were sequenced to
determine the identity of their surface peptides. Corresponding synthetic
peptides labelled with 5(6)-carboxyﬂuorescein (FAM) were used to validate homing; peptides were intravenously injected into pregnant mice and
after three hours, organs were collected for analysis by ﬂuorescence
microscopy.
Results: Phage screening identiﬁed three peptide sequences that were
enriched in uterus and placenta, designated NKG, RSG and RGR. Injection
of the synthetic peptides FAM-NKG, FAM-RSG or FAM-RGR conﬁrmed
placental targeting; all peptides bound to the placental labyrinth and
endothelium of decidual spiral arteries. FAM-NKG did not bind to the
vasculature of any other organ screened; however, FAM-RSG and FAM-RGR
occasionally bound to cells in the spleen. All peptides bound to the
syncytium of human placental explants cultured in vitro.
Conclusion: We have identiﬁed novel peptides that bind to the surface of
the placenta, which will form the basis for a targeted drug delivery system.

Yoshimitsu Kasahara, Yoshikazu Kitahara, Kazuto Nakamura, Takashi
Minegishi
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gunma University Graduate
School of Medicine, Maebashi Gunma, Japan
Objectives: The luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR) belongs to the family
of G protein-coupled receptors that mediate biological effects through
cAMP. The expression of this receptor was previously thought to be
restricted to gonadal tissue. However, recent studies have shown its
presence in many other tissues throughout the reproductive and nonreproductive organs. In this paper, we have investigated the regulation
of LHR expression in rat uterus.
Methods: We have detected LHR mRNA in the immature rat uterus
by Northern blot and down-regulation of this receptor mRNA in the
pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (PMSG) - human chronic gonadotropin (hCG) treated immature rats.
Results: After administration of hCG, the mRNA levels in the rat uterus
declined to a very low level from day 1 to 3 and then rebounded and
reached higher than pretreatment values at day 4.
The cultured uterus displayed an hCG concentration-dependent increase
in cAMP production in medium, and the immunohistochemical experiment showed that these receptor proteins are expressed in the epithelial
cells of endometrium.
Conclusion: These results suggest that functional LHR are present in the
immature rat uterus and are down-regulated and up-regulated by signals
resulting from hCG treatment.
We think that the uterus model of LH receptor expression might contribute
to the investigation of mechanism of LH action in reproductive organs.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.60

P1.61

MATERNAL ENDOTHELIAL FUNCTION GRADUALLY
DETERIORATE IN NORMAL PREGNANCY

SPHINGOSINE 1-PHOSPHATE REGULATES ENDOTHELIAL
PERMEABILITY AND ACCESS OF CIRCULATING
VASOCONSTRICTORS TO SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS IN INTACT
PRESSURIZED UTERINE ARTERIES

Kohei Fujita, Eiji Kondoh, Keiji Tatsumi, Yoshitsugu Chigusa, Haruta
Mogami, Ikuo Konishi
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
Objective: Elevated circulating sFlt-1 levels are observed in preeclamptic
patients, and are closely associated with endothelial dysfunction.
However, the relationship between circulating sFlt-1 levels and the
endothelial function in normal pregnancy remains unclear. The aim of this
study was to elucidate the alteration of endothelial function and its
correlation to plasma sFlt-1 levels using peripheral arterial tonometry
(PAT) throughout normal gestational period as well as the process of
preeclampsia (PE).
Methods: We measured reactive hyperemia index (RHI) to evaluate the
endothelial function using Endo-PAT2000 system during normal pregnancy and simultaneously measured plasma sFlt-1 levels by ELISA. We
also measured endothelial function and circulating sFlt-1 levels in nonpregnant women, preeclamptic patients and pregnant women who
develop PE later.
Results: RHI gradually deteriorated along with the progression of gestational age in normal pregnant women. Plasma sFlt-1 levels exhibited
a gradual increase at the late pregnancy and were inversely correlated with
RHI. In the PE patients, RHI showed a higher value in the presence of higher
plasma sFlt-1 levels compared with normal pregnant women at similar
gestational ages. The number of patients who developed PE at the later
gestational stage was too small to assess another topic whether endothelial function at the earlier stage of gestation is able to predict the onset
of PE.
Conclusion: Our study using PAT showed maternal endothelial function
gradually deteriorated along with the gestational age and endothelial
function and plasma sFlt-1 levels was inversely correlated in the normal
pregnancy. PAT system may be of use to identify novel biomarkers for PE.

A45

Daniel Kerage1,2, Randi B. Gombos1,3, Denise G. Hemmings1,2
1
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada, 2Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, 3Physiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada
Objectives: Increased endothelial permeability occurs in vascular-related
diseases such as preeclampsia. The relationship among arterial endothelial barrier function, access of circulating vasoconstrictors to underlying
smooth muscle and vascular tone has not been explored in intact uterine
arteries. Increased uterine vascular tone reduces nutrient transfer to the
placenta and fetus. Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), a bioactive lipid,
regulates endothelial permeability. We hypothesized that infusion of high
S1P concentrations inside isolated pressurized uterine arteries would
increase endothelial permeability, access of a co-infused vasoconstrictor
to smooth muscle and vascular tone. This would be exacerbated in
pregnancy.
Methods: S1P (10 nM, 1mM), U46619 (5nM), a vasoconstrictor, or the
combination was infused inside pressurized uterine arteries isolated from
non-pregnant (NP) or late pregnant (LP) mice. Vasoconstriction was
compared to that achieved by adding these agents to the outside of arteries
(extraluminal addition). Endothelial permeability to S1P was also assessed
using Evans Blue Dye (EBD) leakage.
Results: In uterine arteries from NP mice intraluminal infusion of U46619
alone did not induce vasoconstriction (3.784.13%) whereas extraluminal
addition did (56.96.75%). Co-infusion of U46619 with 10nM S1P did not
affect vasoconstriction (6.255.57%); however, co-infusion with 1mM S1P
did (33.28.58%). Infusion of 10nM or 1mM S1P alone did not induce
vasoconstriction. Unlike the lack of response in uterine arteries from NP
mice, infusion of U46619 alone induced vasoconstriction in arteries from
LP mice, which was prevented by co-infusion with 10nM S1P but not 1mM
S1P. Permeability measured by EBD leakage was increased by infusion of
1mM but not 10nM S1P.
Conclusion: S1P at low concentration maintains endothelial barrier
function to prevent access of circulating vasoconstrictors to the smooth
muscle in uterine arteries, which is particularly important in pregnancy.
Pathophysiological changes in S1P concentrations and/or S1P receptor
expression could contribute to vascular complications in pregnancy.
Supported by CIHR, NSERC and WCHRI

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A46

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.62

P1.63

INVOLVEMENT OF A2A ADENOSINE RECEPTORS IN INSULININCREASED L-ARGININE TRANSPORT IN HUMAN UMBILICAL
VEIN ENDOTHELIUM

THE DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSION OF KISS 1, MMP9 AND
ANGIOGENIC REGULATORS IN DIFFERENT FETO-MATERNAL
COMPARTMENTS OF HEALTHY PREGNANCIES: IMPLICATIONS
FOR TROPHOBLAST INVASION AND VESSEL DEVELOPMENT

Enrique Guzmán-Gutiérrez, Carlos Salomon, Franscisco Westermeier,
Pablo Arroyo, Fabian Pardo, Andrea Leiva, Luis Sobrevia
Cellular and Molecular Physiology Laboratory (CMPL), Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical Research Centre (CIM), School of Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de, Santiago, Chile
Objectives: Adenosine causes vasodilatation of human placenta vasculature by increasing L-arginine transport via the cationic amino acid transporters 1 (hCAT-1) involving A2A adenosine receptors (A2AAR) activation in
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). hCAT-1 activity and
expression is increased by insulin in HUVEC and A2AAR stimulation
increases insulin sensitivity in subjects with insulin resistance; however,
a potential A2AAR involvement in L-arginine transport modulation by
insulin in HUVEC is unknown. Our aim was to characterize whether
insulin-stimulation of hCAT-1 transport activity involves A2AAR in HUVEC.
Methods: Primary cultured HUVEC (passage 2) from full-term normal
pregnancies were used. Insulin (1 nM, 8 hours) was assayed on hCAT1
expression (SLC7A1 promoter activity (ﬁreﬂy/renilla luciferase for
pGL3-hCAT1-1606 and pGL3-hCAT1-650), mRNA expression (quantitative
real time PCR), protein abundance (Western blot)) and L-arginine transport (3 mCi/ml, 1 minute, 37oC). Moreover, we analyzed total (Akt) and
phosphorylated Akt (PwAkt) levels. Assays were done in absence or
presence of ZM-241385 (10 nM, A2AAR antagonist), CGS-21680 (30 nM,
A2AAR agonist) and/or NBTI (10 mM, adenosine transport inhibitor).
Results: Insulin and NBTI increased the maximal velocity without altering
the apparent Km for L-arginine transport, and hCAT-1 expression (protein
and mRNA). These effects were blocked by 10 nM ZM-241385 (A2AAR
antagonist). ZM-241385–inhibited SLC7A1 reporter transcriptional activity
was similar in cells transfected with pGL3-hCAT-1-1606 or pGL3-hCAT-1-650
constructs, and comparable to the activity determined for pGL3-hCAT-1650
construct in presence of NBTI þ insulin. However, reporter activity was
increased by NBTI only in cells transfected with pGL3-hCAT-1-1606 and the
ZM-241385 sensitive fraction of NBTI response was similar in absence
or presence of insulin. Insulin increase PwAkt/Akt and this effect was
unaltered by agonists/antagonists of A2AAR.
Conclusion: hCAT-1 expression and activity is under regulation by insulin
via a mechanism requiring functional A2AAR in HUVEC. This mechanism
does not involve Akt signaling pathway. These effects could be determinant in diseases associated with fetal insulin resistance.

Mushi Matjila1,2, Robert Millar2,3, Arieh Katz2, Zephne van der Spuy1
1
Groote Schuur Hospital (Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology),
Cape Town, South Africa, 2Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine(Division of Medical Biochemistry-Receptor Biology Unit), Cape
Town, South Africa, 3Mammalian Research Institute, University of Pretoria,
Pretoria, South Africa
Objectives: To investigate the transcript and protein expression proﬁles of
genes involved in trophoblast invasion and angiogenesis across the
fetomaternal compartments of healthy human pregnancies.
Methods: Three feto-maternal tissue compartments, namely the placenta,
placental bed and decidua parietalis were sampled at elective caesarean
delivery of healthy term pregnancies. Real-time RT PCR was employed to
investigate gene expression while Immunohistochemistry and Western
Blot analyses were utilised to study protein expression in these tissues. The
expression of genes involved in trophoblast invasion namely Kiss1, Kiss1
Receptor (Kiss1R) and MMP9 were investigated. In addition, we examined
the expression of angiogenic ligands VEGF A and PROK1 as well as their
respective receptors (VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and PROK1R) at the three
feto-maternal sites.
Results: We found that the expression of Kiss1 (p<0.001), Kiss1R (p< 0.05)
and MMP9 (p<0.01) were higher in the placenta in comparison to the
placental bed and decidua parietalis. The expression of VEGF A was highest
in the placental bed (p<0.001) whereas that of its receptors differed across
the feto-maternal interphase. While VEGFR1 expression was highest in the
placenta (p<0.01), the expression of VEGFR2 was highest in the placental
bed (p<0.001). In contrast, both PROK1 (p<0.001) and its receptor PROK1R
(p<0.001) had highest expression in the placenta.
Conclusion: Genes involved in invasion were highly expressed in the fetal
compartment which suggests that the inﬂuence on invasion capacity
may largely be exercised at the fetal level. Furthermore, our ﬁndings on
angiogenic gene expression proﬁles suggest that angiogenesis may be
regulated by two distinct pathways with the PROK1/PROK1R system
speciﬁcally mediating angiogenesis in the fetus and VEGFA/VEGFR2 ligandreceptor pair predominantly but not exclusively mediating maternal
angiogenesis.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A47

P1.64

P1.65

THE EFFECTS OF PLACENTAL PERICTYES ON THE
ANGIOGENESIS OF MICROVASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL CELLS

A RETROSPECTIVE STUDY ON NEONATAL OUTCOME RELATION
WITH CHORIOAMNIONITIS DELIVERED FROM 26 TO 32 WEEKS
OF GESTATION

Youngnam Kim1,2, Helen N. Jones1, Kicheol Kil1, Stephanie Lang1, Charles
Klanke1, Sundeep G. Keswani1, Foong-Yen Lim1, Timothy M. Crombleholme1,3, Mourina A. Habli1
1
Center for Molecular Fetal Therapy, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, USA, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Pusan
Paik Hospital, Inje University, Busan, Republic of Korea, 3Children’s
Hospital Colorado, Aurora, USA
Objectives: Angiogenesis plays a key role in placental development,
remodeling and fetal growth. Impaired placental angiogenesis is associated with fetal growth restriction and preeclampsia. The placental
microvasculature is very important to placental angiogenesis. The perivascular cells (pericytes) are also associated with stabilization and
remodeling of the placental vasculature. We hypothesized that isolated
human placental pericytes can increase and stabilize placental capillary
formation when grown in co-culture.
Methods: Human placental microvascular endothelial cells (HPMVECs)
and human placental pericytes (PC) were isolated from microvillus of term
placenta and cell types were conﬁrmed using immunocytochemistry
(anti-CD31 and vWF for HPMVECs and anti-NG2 for PCs). The capillary
formation with HPMVECs grown on nutrient-depleted matrigel in EGM2
and measured the number of branching points formed at 3 and 5 hours.
RNA expression of angiogenic factors and their receptors (PDGFb, PDFGRb,
VEGFa, VEGFR1, VEGFR2, Angiopoietin 1 (Ang 1) and TEK) were quantiﬁed
by real-time PCR. We compared the results of HPMEVCs alone and
HPVMECs co-cultured with PCs. Statistical analyses were performed with
student’s t-test. P values < 0.05 were considered statistically signiﬁcant.
Results: HPMEVCs stained positively for anti-CD 31, vWF and NG2. In
contrast, PCs only stained positively for anti-NG2. The capillary tube
formation of HPMVECs co-cultured with PCs was accelerated compared to
HPMVECs alone. The number of branching points were signiﬁcantly
increased in HPMVECs co-cultured with PCs at 3 hours (p<0.01) and even
at 5 hours (p<0.01). PC increases VEGFR1 and VEGFa, but reduces VEGFR2
and slightly reduces PDGFb expression in HPMVECs. In contrast, there is no
change in PDGFRb, TEK or Ang1 expression.
Conclusion: Human placental pericytes accelerate and stabilize capillary
formation from HPMVECs and the underlying mechanisms may include
increased VEGFR1 and VEGFa and decreased VEGFR2 and PDGFb
expression.

Michihisa Shiro, Tamaki Yahata, Mika Mizoguchi, Sakiko Nanjo, Madoka
Yamamoto, Yuko Tanizaki, Aya Kobayashi, Toshihide Matsuoka, Nami Ota,
Rei Kitano, Yasushi Mabuchi, Chie Yata, Shigetaka Yagi, Masaaki Iwahashi,
Sawako Minami, Kazuhiko Ino
Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama City, Japan
Objectives: Chorioamnionitis is a main cause of preterm delivery. Severe
chorioamnionitis may have a signiﬁcant impact on neonatal outcome. We
conducted a study on pathological ﬁndings of chorioamnionitis and its
association with neonatal outcome.
Methods: This was a retrospective study of 138 patients who delivered
from 26 weeks 0 day to 32 weeks 6 days, between January 2005 and
December 2010 in our hospital. The cases of chromosomal abnormality or
multiple gestations were excluded. The patients were classiﬁed as [Group
with CAM; n¼95) (CAM is grade 1 or more by Blanc classiﬁcation) or
[Group without CAM; n¼43] (No pathological CAM). [Group with CAM]
was subdivided into the following groups; [Mild CAM; n¼70] (no umbilical
cord inﬂammation in the CAM of grade 1 or 2) or [Severe CAM; n¼25]
(CAM of grade 3 and / or umbilical cord inﬂammation). We evaluated
maternal factors and neonatal outcomes.
Results: There were no signiﬁcant differences except maternal age and the
primiparous rate between [Group with CAM] and [Group without CAM].
Comparing [Mild CAM] with [Severe CAM], there were statistically
signiﬁcant differences in gestational age at delivery (30.02.0 weeks vs.
28.61.9 weeks, p¼0.003), maternal C-reactive protein (CRP) before
delivery (0.3 mg/dL [0.0-5.5] vs. 1.1 mg/dL[0.2-8.2], p<0.001), rate of
maternal CRPS2 mg/dL (9.5% vs. 34.8%, p¼0.013), rate of chronic lung
disorders (CLD) infant in need of home oxygen therapy (HOT) (0/10 vs.
3/6，p¼0.035).
Conclusion: The severe CAM group showed earlier gestational age at
delivery and had an impact on infant’s necessity of HOT. To evaluate severe
CAM and umbilical cord inﬂammation with a proper assessment of
maternal CRP was suggested to be important in determining the appropriate time of termination.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A48

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.66
REGULATION OF TROPHOBLASTIC CELLS INVASION BY
ONCOSTATIN M AND LEUKEMIA INHIBITORY FACTOR (LIF)
Wittaya Chaiwangyen, Diana Morales-Prieto, Stephanie Ospina-Prieto,
Francisco Lazaro Pereira de Sousa, Udo R Markert
Placenta Laboratories, Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena,
Jena, Germany
Objectives: Trophoblast cells perform invasion similar to tumors, but in
a well regulated physiological manner and dysregulation may lead to
severe pathologies. Numerous factors regulate trophoblast invasion for
successful pregnancy including cytokines. Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)
and Oncostatin M (OSM) are members of the interleukin-6 superfamily. LIF
induces trophoblast invasiveness via signal transducers and activators of
transcription 3(STAT3), but activation mechanisms seem to differ in
different cell lines and are not yet completely investigated. Therefore, the
aim of our study is to analyze and compare the role of Extracellular
Regulated Kinase (ERK)/STAT in trophoblast and choriocarcinoma cells
with different invasive capacities.

Methods: The immortalized human trophoblast cell line HTR-8/svneo, the
choriocarcinoma cell line JEG-3, and the hybrids of JEG-3 derivates and 1st
and 3rd trimester trophoblast cells ACH-3P and AC1-M59, were incubated
in presence or absence of LIF or OSM. The activation and expression of
STAT3 and extracellular regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) were measured by
gel electrophoresis and Western blotting and quantiﬁed by use of
a chemiluminescence gel documentation system. DNA binding assay was
analysed using TransAm STAT family kit. The effect on cell proliferation and
invasiveness were determined by a MTS colorimetric assay and a Matrigel
invasion assay. Gelatin zymography was performed on conditioned
medium of choriocarcinoma cells. For determined the role of STAT3, it was
blocked with a chemical inhibitor.
Results: LIF and OSM stimulated the phosphorylation of STAT3 and ERK1/2
in all analyzed cell lines, but at different intensities. LIF also enhanced
proliferation of ACH-3P cells, AC1-M59 cells and JEG-3 cells but stimulated
invasiveness only of ACH-3P cells and JEG-3 cells. In contrast, proliferation
and invasion were not affected by OSM. Activity of MMP-2 and MMP-9
decreased in choriocarcinoma cells treated with STAT3 inhibitor.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings demonstrate that the LIF-ERK1/2-STAT3 axis
exists in different trophoblastic cell lines, but its activation may lead to
different functions, which may be due to speciﬁc properties of each cell line.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.67
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS ON THE INVASION POTENTIALS OF
TRANSFORMED HUMAN FIRST TRIMESTER TROPHOBLAST AND
CHORIOCARCINOMA CELL LINES
Anushuya Tamang1, Preethi Doravari1, Morgan Mathieu1,2, Shiva
Sivasubramaniam1
1
School of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, UK, 2The John van Geest Cancer Research
Centre, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, UK
Placental derived cell lines have been used as an in vitro model to study the
pathophysiology of many pregnancy-related disorders. To satisfy the need
of long term culture these cell lines were developed either from choriocarcinoma (JEG-3 and BeWo) or by transformation of ﬁrst trimester extravillous trophoblast cells (TEV-1 and HTR-8/SVneo). However these cell lines
show different morphological and physiological characteristics; therefore

A49

they “behave” differently from one another. This study aims to compare the
invasion potentials of human ﬁrst trimester trophoblast cell lines, TEV-1 and
HTR-8/SV-neo, with choriocarcinoma cell lines, JEG-3 and BeWo in relation
invasiveness of human ﬁbrosarcoma cells, HT1080 (positive control).
Cell invasion assays were carried out in the 24 well-plate BD BioCoatÔ
Tumour Invasion System. Cell suspensions in serum free media were
added into the apical inserts of test/control plates and invasion was
triggered by adding the chemo attractant (5% foetal bovine serum) to the
basal chambers. The setup was incubated for 22 hours at 37◦C with 5% CO2
and the percentage of invading cells was calculated.
Percentage invasion of HT-1080 was approximately 80%, which agreed
with the predicted results by the assay manufacturer. Of the ﬁrst trimester
extravillous trophoblast cell lines, HTR-8/SVneo showed 43% (SEM2.1)
invasion whereas TEV-1 cell line was lower at 17% (SEM6.21). Likewise
the choriocarcinoma cell lines JEG-3 showed a higher percentage invasion
at 51% (SEM1.78) than BeWo (17.4% SEM4.3) (see ﬁgure). This shows
JEG-3 versus HTR8/SVneo or BeWo versus TEV-1 are suitable cell lines for
comparative invasive assay.

Ă

These results suggest that invasion properties are different in different
placental and choriocarcinoma cell lines. Therefore care should be taken in
selecting a comparative pair of choriocarcinoma and ﬁrst trimester
trophoblast cell lines as models for trophoblastic tumour cells versus
normal trophoblast cells.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A50

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.68

P1.69

ROLE OF N-ACETYLGLUCOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE IVA IN
CHORIOCARCINOMA

THE INFLUENCE OF ONCOSTATIN M ON THE EPITHELIALMESENCHYMAL TRANSITION AND TROPHOBLAST INVASION

Kaoru Niimi, Eiko Yamamoto, Yukio Mano, Hiroyuki Tsuda, Seiji Sumigama,
Kanako Shinjo, Sawako Fujiwara, Tomomi Kotani, Fumitaka Kikkawa
Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan

Hyun Sun Ko, Hee Kyung Kang, Ho Shik Kim, Sae Kyung Choi, In Yang Park,
Jong Chul Shin
Catholic University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

Objectives: Gestational trophoblastic diseases (GTDs) are related to
trophoblasts and the glycoprotein hormone human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is a useful diagnostic and follow-up marker for GTDs,
although it is secreted by trophoblasts of all kinds of pregnancies as well as
GTDs. However, the asparagine-linked sugar chains on hCG in the serum
and urine from patients with invasive mole and choriocarcinoma contain
abnormal biantennary structures, which are not detected in normal
pregnant women and hydatidiform molar patients. N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase IV (GnT-IV) catalyzes b1, 4-N-acetylglucosamine
(b1-4GlcNAc) branching on asparagine-linked oligosaccharides and is
required to synthesize the abnormal biantennary sugar chain structures on
hCG. The aim of this study was to clarify GnT-IVa expression in GTDs and
human placentas and determine the role of GnT-IVa in choriocarcinoma.
Methods and Results: Immunohistochemistry showed that GnT-IVa was
not detected in hydatidiform mole but highly expressed in trophoblastic
cells of choriocarcinoma and invasive mole, which are malignant subtypes
of GTDs. These results were the same as those of RT-PCR and Western blot
analyses. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)mediated knockdown of GnT-IVa
expression in Jar cells, a choriocarcinoma cell line, signiﬁcantly reduced
their migration and invasive capacities, although MTS assay showed that
there were no effects on cell proliferation. In vivo studies using athymic
nude mice bearing Jar cell tumors further demonstrated that knockdown
of GnT-IVa signiﬁcantly suppressed tumor engraftment and growth.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings suggest that GnT-IVa might be involved in
tumorigenic activity of choriocarcinoma.

Objectives: Oncostatin M (OSM), a cytokine of the interleukin-6 (IL-6)
family, can either promote or inhibit cell growth in various normal and
tumor cells and is expressed in rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis,
multiple myeloma, and other inﬂammatory and neoplastic conditions. Our
objective was to evaluate the effects of exogenous OSM on the invasion of
trophoblasts and modulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Methods: We investigated OSM effects on the expression of both cell-cell
contact proteins and mesenchymal marker in the human placental cell line
derived from ﬁrst trimester extravillous trophoblasts (HTR8SVneo). We
studied also OSM effects on the in vitro invasion of HTR8SVneo cell line.
Results: We found the differential regulation of E-cadherin, vascular
endothelial (VE)-cadherin, and vimentin by OSM. OSM attenuated the
constitutive RNA and protein expressions of E-Cadherin, but enhanced
expressions of vimentin. There was no signiﬁcant change in the expressions of VE-Cadherin. We also found that OSM increased invasion activities
of HTR8SVneo cells in time-dependent and dose-dependent manners.
Conclusion: This study suggests that OSM enhances EMT of trophoblasts
during the ﬁrst trimester and it might be related with the increased
invasion of extravillous trophoblasts.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A51

P1.70

P1.71

INTERVENTIONAL RADIOLOGY FOR PLACENTA PREVIA
ACCRETA AT A TERTIARY CARE UNIT IN JAPAN

CD44 ACCELERATES TROPHOBLASTIC INVASION: IN VITRO
INVASION ANALYSIS USING HTR8/SVNEO CELLS

Akane Kondo1,2, Akira Mori1,3, Kanako Mitsuzuka1, Shigeru Sato1, Atsuko
Togo1, Tadashi Matsumoto1,4, Tomoko Adachi2, Masao Nakabayashi2,
Osamu Nishimura1, Hitoshi Ishimoto1
1
Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan, 2Aiiku
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, 3Tokyo City University, Tokyo, Japan, 4Keio
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan

Hironori Takahashi1,2, Kunio Kikuchi2, Tomoyuki Kuwata1, Rie Usui1, Akihide Ohkuchi1, Hisanori Matsumoto3, Yukiyasu Sato3, Hiroshi Fujiwara3,
Kumiko Ui-Tei4, Shigeki Matsubara1, Mitsuaki Suzuki1, Toshihiro
Takazawa2
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Jichi Medical University,
Tochigi, Japan, 2Department of Molecular Anatomy and Medicine, Nippon
Medical School, Tokyo, Japan, 3Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan, 4Biophysics
and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan

Objectives: It is apparent that high risk pregnancy has been increased
these days, especially abnormal placentation such as placenta previa,
placenta accreta. This is related to the rate of caesarean section due to the
maternal age and/or pregnancy by assisted reproductive technology.
Although uterine artery embolization (UAE) is a well-recognized treatment
for postpartum hemorrhage with a high clinical efﬁcacy, the reported
success rate of UAE for postpartum hemorrhage associated with placenta
accreta is not high. We reviewed the management of placenta previa
accreta at our hospital and highlights recent advances and developments.
Methods: Eleven consecutive patients between 1999 and 2012 who
underwent UAE for the management of placenta previa accreta were
included in this retrospective study. The entire patient had hysterectomy
after caesarean section. Four patients underwent UAE during the operation
(UAE group) and 7 did not prepare for UAE during the operation (non-UAE
group). Medical records were reviewed regarding the delivery and UAE
procedure.
Results: The amount of blood loss during the operation was 19011057.0
ml (mean  SD) in the UAE group and 3486.11743.0 ml in the non-UAE
group. The duration of operation was 213.544.5 min in the UAE group
and 215.661.8 min in the non-UAE group respectively. The UAE group
used only autologous blood transfusion (800282 ml) and was able to
avoid homologous blood transfusion whereas the non-UAE group needed
additional homologous blood transfusion 16001222 ml in average.
Conclusion: Appropriate surgical and pharmacological treatments should
be combined for each hemorrhagic condition. Interventional radiology
(IVR) is the highly effective option to reduce blood loss. Although there are
no randomized controlled trials, our analysis showed that IVR is one of the
effective techniques in hemostatic control in placenta accreta previa.
Further analysis is required to clarify the role of IVR in the management of
obstetric hemorrhage.

Objectives: Although extravillous trophoblast (EVT) invasion into the
decidua is essential for successful pregnancy, its detailed mechanism
remains unclear. In cancer cells, binding of HA to CD44 induces cell
migration and invasion. It was previously reported that EVT expresses an
adhesion molecule, CD44 on their cell surfaces (Goshen et al. Mol Hum
Reprod 2: 685-691, 1996). Interestingly, a ligand of CD44, hyaluronic acid
(HA) is located in the decidua. These facts led us to speculate that interaction of CD44 and HA may be involved in mechanisms of human extravillous trophoblast invasion into the decidua. The purpose of this study
was to test this hypothesis using HTR8/SVneo cells as an in vitro model of
EVT.
Methods: The mRNA and protein expressions of CD44 were measured
by real-time PCR and Western blot analyses, respectively. HA-induced
invasion of HTR8/SVneo cells was evaluated by matrigel-coated transwell assay using Boyden chamber. To examine an effect of CD44 on the
invasion, small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) against CD44 mRNA were
generated and used for CD44 knockdown. The methylation of CpG sites
within CD44 promoter region was examined by a bisulﬁte DNA sequencing
method.
Results: HTR8/SVneo cells expressed CD44 as both mRNA and protein
levels. HA signiﬁcantly enhanced invasion of HTR8/SVneo cells. The HAinduced invasion was inhibited with CD44 siRNA transfected HTR8/
SVneo cells. The CpG sites within CD44 promoter region were unmethylated in HTR8/SVneo. However, other in vitro models of villous trophoblast,
BeWo and JEG3 cells did not express CD44, and their CpG sites within CD44
promoter region were hypermethylated. In addition, HA did not affect the
invasion of BeWo or JEG3 cell.
Conclusion: Our results imply that the CD44-HA interaction plays a role in
EVT invasion. Furthermore, the hypomethylation of CD44 promoter region
may be associated with the upregulation of CD44 expression in EVT.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A52

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.72

P1.73

DNA MICROARRAY ANALYSIS OF INVASIVE TROPHOBLAST IN
PLACENTA ACCRETA

REGULATORY ROLE OF SPHINGOSINE-1-PHOSPHATE IN
MIGRATION OF HUMAN TROPHOBLAST

Satoshi Matsukawa, Seiji Sumigama, Tomoko Nakano, Yuka Hattori, Yuriko
Watanabe, Yukio Mano, Hiroyuki Tsuda, Tomomi Kotani, Li Hua, Kaoru
Niimi, Sawako Fujiwara, Fumitaka Kikkawa
Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya City, Japan

Hisanori Matsumoto, Yukiyasu Sato, Hirohiko Tani, Koh Suginami, Akihito
Horie, Hiroshi Fujiwara, Ikuo Konishi
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan

Placenta accreta is an abnormal condition of invasive placental implantation that causes massive hemorrhage at delivery and threatens maternal
life. Abnormal villous invasion is found when decidua is defective and this
condition is associated to previous uterine operations including caesarean
sections, however, its mechanisms are still unclear. The objective of the
current study is to examine molecular biological change of trophoblast
invasion in placenta accreta by DNA microarray analysis. We isolated
villous trophoblast from invasive site and control from non-invasive site in
a case of placenta accreta and extracted complementary DNA by RT-PCR. A
DNA microarray analysis was performed and 104 transcripts were identiﬁed as signiﬁcantly overexpressed gene in invasion site. Gene ontology
analysis revealed enhancement of gene known to play a role in peptidase
activity. The 3 most signiﬁcantly overexpressed genes were matrix
metalloproteinase-19 (MMP-19), a disintegrin and metalloproteinase-28
(ADAM-28) and cathepsin L2. To ascertain the micoarray results we performed immunohistochemistry in several accreta cases and revealed poor
expression of MMP-19 and no difference between invasion and noninvasion site in ADAM-28, however a abundant expression of cathepsin
L2 in especially in extra-villous trophoblast in invasion site. Thus, our data
suggests a role for cathepsin L2 in the regulation of abnormal invasion of
trophoblast in case of placenta accreta.

Objectives: In the ﬁrst-trimester of pregnancy, cytotrophoblast differentiate into extravillous trophoblast (EVT) at villous-anchoring sites. EVT
invades and remodels maternal artery to secure the adequate placental
blood ﬂow to the fetus. We previously reported that maternal platelets are
attached to the endovascular trophoblast and activated inside the spiral
arteries. We also demonstrated that platelet-derived soluble factors as
a whole stimulate the migration of EVT cells isolated from the ﬁrsttrimester chorionic villous explant cultures, suggesting that platelets
play an important role in maternal spiral artery remodeling by EVT cells. In
this study, we focused on another platelet-derived soluble factor,
sphingosine-1- phosphate (S1P) and examine its physiological roles in EVT
function.
Methods: Expression of S1P receptors was examined using the isolated
EVT cells derived from the ﬁrst-trimester chorionic villous explant
cultures, Swan 71 cells (trophoblastic cell line) and BeWo cells (choriocarcinoma cell line) by RT-PCR, immunocytochemical staining, and
Western blotting. Effects of S1P on proliferation and invasion of the
isolated EVT cells, Swan71 cells, and BeWo cells were examined by WST
assay and Matrigel invasion assay, respectively.
Results: Among ﬁve SIP receptors (S1P1-5), S1P2 and S1P3 were expressed
in the isolated EVT cells and Swan71 cells. S1P promoted the invasion of
these cells without affecting their proliferation. By contrast, S1P promotes
proliferation of BeWo cells, which express only S1P2, without affecting
their invasion.
Conclusion: S1P may be one of platelet-derived soluble factors that drives
EVT invasion towards maternal artery.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.74

P1.75

IL-33, A NOVEL IL-1 FAMILY MEMBER, REGULATES FUNCTION
OF PRIMARY FIRST TRIMESTER TROPHOBLASTS

PATHOLOGIC DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN PLACENTA
ACCRETA AND ADHERENT PLACENTA

Valerie Fock1, Mario Mairhofer1,2, Harald Zeisler1, Martin Knöﬂer1, Jürgen
Pollheimer1
1
Department of Obstetrics and Fetal-Maternal Medicine, Reproductive
Biology Unit, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 2Department
of Gynaecological Obstetrics and Reproductive Medicine, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

Masayoshi Arizawa
Ohtsuka Hospital, Toshimaku, Tokyo, Japan

Objectives: Our aim was to ﬁrstly characterize expression pattern of IL-33
and its receptor IL1RL1 (ST2L) in the placenta and the fetal-maternal
interface. In a second step, we evaluated its potential in regulating
proliferation and invasion of ﬁrst trimester trophoblasts.
Methods: In order to identify cellular sources of IL-33 we performed
Western Blot analyses of FACS-sorted CD45þ and CD45- cells, isolated
from placental villi and decidua. Moreover, we performed immunohistochemical (IHC) stainings of ﬁrst trimester placental and decidual sections
to further characterize IL-33-expressing cells. IL1RL1-positive cells were
identiﬁed by IHC stainings and FACS analyses. We further stimulated ﬁrst
trimester ﬂoating explants with rhu IL-33 and/or its natural inhibitor sST2
and determined BrdU incorporation in villous CTBs and proximal CC
trophoblasts. Migration was evaluated by studying differentiating villous
explant cultures on collagen-I or invading isolated trophoblasts in the
absence or presence of IL-33 and/or sST2. Protease activity was measured
using supernatants of IL-33-stimulated ﬁrst trimester villous explants and
primary EVTs.
Results: Cytoplasmatic IL-33 is found in villous and decidual macrophages
and its receptor IL1RL1 is strongly expressed in villous CTBs, CC trophoblasts and invasive decidual iCTBs. Interestingly, macrophages expressed
full length IL-33 and a 20 kDa form similar in size to a recently published
secreted IL-33 fragment. Moreover, IL-33 induced proliferation of villous
and CC trophoblasts and enhanced invasion of primary EVTs in vitro. Both
effects were reversible by the addition of sST2. Finally, IL-33 induced
secretion of uPA, PAI-1/2 and MMP9 in villous explant cultures and
primary EVTs.
Conclusion: Placental and decidual macrophages constitute putative
sources for extracellular IL-33 to activate ST2L-expressing CTBs and EVTs.
Functional in vitro assays further suggest that IL-33 inﬂuences trophoblast
invasion and proliferation. Taken together, we propose that macrophagederived IL-33 may act as a novel key regulator of trophoblast function.
Funding: Supported by grant P-22687-B13 of the Austrian Science Funds
(FWF), and by grant 13955 of the Austrian National Bank.

A53

Purpose: When placenta accreta occurs without the placenta being
delivered we must be careful about obstetric bleedings, hemorrhagic
shock, sepsis, and DIC. The removal of the placenta may have to be performed by manual abrasion, or else a hysterectomy may become necessary.
The outcome depends on the degree of villous invasion and range of
myometrium. Adherent placenta is different to placenta accreta in that
adherent placenta is placenta attached to uterus smooth muscle. Placenta
accreta is placenta which invades uterus smooth muscle by the pathologic
examination. When the placenta and uterus are submitted to pathologic
examination, there is a difference between adherent placenta and placenta
accreta. I determined the differentiation of these pathologic ﬁndings and
the clinical conditions.
Method: I examined one percreta, four increta, two accrete and ﬁve
adherent placenta, pathologically.
Results: The ﬁve cases of percreta and increta led to hysterectomy. The two
accrete and ﬁve adherent placentas had damage, but avoided hysterectomy. The ﬁve cases that resulted in hysterectomy showed villous invasion
into uterus smooth muscle pathologically. As for the seven cases that were
treated manually, two placentas accrete had damage to the placenta and
come with attached uterus smooth muscle. Five adherent placentas did not
have uterus smooth muscle with placenta. However, there were decidual
inﬂammation and a very thin decidua.
Discussion: In Japan a deﬁnition of the adherent placentas already exists, I
have added a newly pathologic characteristic; decidual inﬂammation and
a very thin decidua. I hope it will be possible to make use of these
pathologic ﬁndings.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A54

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.76

P1.77

NUCLEAR MATRIX ASSOCIATED GENES, SATB1 AND SATB2
REGULATE TROPHOBLAST DIFFERENTIATION

ISOLATION OF TROPHOBLAST HOESCHT SIDE POPULATIONS
FROM HUMAN FIRST TRIMESTER VILLI

Kazuo Asanoma1,2, Kaiyu Kubota2, Damayanti Chakraborty2, Stephen
Renaud2, Norio Wake1, Kotaro Fukushima1, Michael Soares2, M. A. Karim
Rumi2
1
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 2University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, Kansas, USA

Jo James, Larry Chamley
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand

Objectives: There is still much to be elucidated in the molecular system of
trophoblast differentiation. To identify a novel pathway in trophoblast
differentiation, we focused on two nuclear matrix associated genes, Satb1
and Satb2 (Satbs), which are highly expressed in murine trophoblast stem
(TS) cells.
Methods: Satbs mRNA and protein expression were examined in placentas
of rat early embryos and in several trophoblast cell lines: mouse, rat TS cell
lines and Rcho-1 cells. Effects of knockdown or overexpression of Satbs
were examined in the trophoblast cells.
Results: Satbs were highly expressed in the trophoblast cells maintained in
the stem cell state and rapidly declined after induction of differentiation.
Satbs proteins were also expressed in the rat placenta at early gestational
stages and disappeared as gestation went on. Knockdown of Satbs
expression induced trophoblast differentiation, whereas forced expression
of Satbs promoted TS cell proliferation and inhibited its differentiation. We
identiﬁed a well-known regulator of TS cells, Eomes as a direct target for
Satbs. Satbs knockdown decreased Eomes mRNA levels and its promoter
activity. On the other hand, forced Satbs expression increased Eomes
mRNA levels and its promoter activity. Our electrophoretic mobility shift
assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses demonstrated that
Satbs proteins physically associate with a regulatory site within the Eomes
promoter.
Conclusion: Satbs promote TS cell maintenance and inhibit its differentiation. This function is mediated in part by regulating the expression of
Eomes, which is a key regulator of trophoblast differentiation.

Objectives: We currently understand very little about how human
trophoblast lineages develop and what regulates their cell fate decisions.
Whether placental villi contain trophoblast stem cells is not yet established. When stained with Hoescht and analysed by ﬂow cytometry, many
stem cell populations form a ‘side-population’ as a result of their ability to
rapidly efﬂux the stain. We used this trait to examine whether trophoblast
stem cells are resident in ﬁrst trimester villous tissue and to isolate these
cells to use as a functional model of human trophoblast differentiation.
Methods: Villi from placentae of 6-9 weeks of gestation were dissected
from the membranes, digested overnight in trypsin, and harvested by
repeated washing with PBS. Cells were stained with Hoescht 33342 and
Propidium Iodide. Live Hoescht side populations were identiﬁed and isolated using a Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorter. Purity was determined by
immunoﬂuorescent double labelling for cytokeratin 7 and vimentin.
Results: 94.7% (2.3% SE, n¼3) of live cells obtained from villi were
cytokeratin positive. 0.48% (0.13 SE, range 0.1-1.28%, n¼9) of these cells
formed a Hoescht side-population. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed that 98.4% (0.2% SE, n¼3) of side-population cells were cytokeratin positive and vimentin negative.
Conclusion: We have isolated a population of trophoblasts from ﬁrst
trimester placental villi that form a Hoescht side population, which is
characteristic of stem cells. Future characterisation of this population will
determine whether these stem-cell-like trophoblasts express key stem cell
markers and are able to differentiate into syncytiotrophoblast and
extravillous trophoblast.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A55

P1.78

P1.79

IDENTIFICATION OF HUMAN TROPHOBLAST STEM CELLS

THE INTERACTION OF NEUTROPHILS AND HUMAN PLACENTAL
MULTIPOTENT MESENCHYMAL STROMAL CELLS DURING
PLACENTAL INFECTION

Tetsunori Inagaki, Kiyoko Kato, Hitomi Okabe, Shintaro Makino, Satoru
Takeda
Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan
Objective: Although insufﬁcient formation of placenta cause diseases,
such as the fetal growth restriction, the mechanism of placental formation
remains undetermined. It has been suggested that trophoblast stem cells
(TSCs) exist in placenta. Stem cell enriched subpopulations, sidepopulation (SP) cells have been identiﬁed in several tissues. In this
study, we isolated SP cells from HTR-8 SVneo cells originated from the
extravillous cytotrophoblast in the ﬁrst trimester and JAR cells, which are
a choriocarcinoma cell line after normal pregnancy and investigated the
characteristics of these cells.
Methods:

1) SP cells were isolated from HTR-8 SVneo cells and JAR cells.
2) We performed microarray expression analysis for screening
up-regulated genes in TSCs on a set of HTR-8SVneo-SP cells and
-NSP cells.
3) Time-dependent transition of supposed gene expression in
HTR-8/SVneo SP cells cultured with the differentiation condition was conﬁrmed by real time PCR.
4) We investigated the SP speciﬁc gene expression in choriocarcinoma cell line JAR.
Result:

1) SP cells exist in both HTR-8/SVneo cells and JAR cells. They have
long-term proliferative capacity of the cell cultures.
2) In microarray analysis on a set of HTR-8SVneo-SP cells and
-NSP cells,
the TSC markers in mice such as CDX2, SOX2 and BMP7 are signiﬁcantly
up-regulated in SP cells compared with NSP cells. We also identiﬁed two
up-regulated genes (geneA and geneB).

3) After HTR-8/SVneo SP cells were cultured in the differentiation
condition medium for 7days, the expression of these TSC
markers and gene A were gradually down-regulated.
4) The expression of gene B, but not gene A, was also up regulated
in JAR-SP cells compared with JAR-NSP cells.

Chie-Pein Chen1,2, Yi-Yung Chen1, Jian-Pei Huang1, Yi-Hsin Wu1,2,
Hsiao-Rou Liu1,2
1
Division of High Risk Pregnancy, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, 2Department of Medical Research, Mackay Memorial Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan
Objective: The role of human placental multipotent mesenchymal stromal
cells (hPMSCs) in the placental inﬂammation has not been explored. We
hypothesize that placenta-speciﬁc hPMSCs involve in early phases of
bacterial inﬂection.
Methods: hPMSCs were isolated from term placentas and neutrophils
were from peripheral blood of healthy volunteers. Toll-like receptors (TLR)
and cytokine expression by hPMSCs and the inﬂuence of TLR4 ligand,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), on the alteration of TLR4 and cytokine expression
in hPMSCs was studied by RT-PCR and FlowMultiplex kit. hPMSCconditioned medium for stimulation experiments was collected with or
without 1 mg/ml LPS stimulation after conﬂuent culture. Fresh RPMI1640
culture medium and LPS were used as controls. The neutrophil activation,
migration, production of reactive oxygen species, apoptosis and STAT3
phosphorylation were assessed by ﬂow cytometry, transwell.and Western
blot.
Results: hPMSCs expressed TLR1, TLR3, TLR4, TLR5, TLR7 and TLR9. LPS
stimulation increased the expression of TLR4 and the production of IL6 and
IL8 by hPMSCs. Neutrophil CD11b expression was activated and cell
migration was promoted by hPMSC-conditioned medium, which was
further enhanced by hPMSC-conditioned medium previously challenged
with LPS. These effects were blocked by anti-IL8 neutralizing antibody. LPS
stimulation increased the reactive oxygen species production by neutrophils. hPMSC-conditioned medium induced STAT3 activation in neutrophils,
which was inhibited by neutralizing antibody to IL6. hPMSC-conditioned
medium rescued neutrophils from apoptosis. The conditioned medium
pretreated by LPS signiﬁcantly decreased the anti-apoptotic effect than that
of conditioned medium without LPS pretreatment. The depletion of IL-6
from the conditioned medium further inhibited the anti-apoptotic effect
on neutrophils.
Conclusion: Our results demonstrate the functional interaction between
hPMSCs and peripheral blood neutrophils upon bacterial challenge and
suggest IL-8 produced by hPMSC recruits neutrophils and IL-6 expression
by hPMSCs reduces the neutrophil apoptosis.

Conclusion:

1) HTR-8/SV neo-SP cells are stem cell enriched subpopulations.
2) Gene A is a candidate of the TSC marker. 3) Gene B is a candidate of stem cell maker of the choriocarcinoma.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A56

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.80

P1.81

CYTOGENETIC AND STEM CELL MARKER CHARACTERIZATION
OF HTR8/SVNEO AND JEG-3 CELLS

TROPHOBLAST AND EMBRYONIC STEM CELL MARKERS ARE
EXPRESSED IN VILLOUS TROPHOBLAST OF HEALTHY, HUMAN
1ST , BUT NOT 3RD TRIMESTER, PLACENTAE

Maja Weber1, Claudia Göhner1, Sebastian San Martin2, Mario Parraga2, Udo
R Markert1, Justine S Fitzgerald1
1
Placentalab, Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Jena,
Germany, 2Reproductive Biology Research Centre, School of Medicine,
Universidad de Valparaiso, Valaparaiso, Chile
The genetically anonymous HTR8/SVneo cell line has become a popular
model of trophoblast cells because of its purported proximity to the
physiological situation. HTR8/SVneo cells are simian-virus-transfected
trophoblast cells in contrast to other trophoblastic cell lines, such as
JEG-3, that are derived from choriocarcinoma tumors or metastases.
It has been suggested that HTR8/SVneo possess progenitor characteristics,
while JEG-3 has been described as a candidate cancer stem cell (CSC). Stem
cell transcription markers propagate stem cell characteristics such as selfrenewal in both physiological, as well as cancer stem cells. Our aim was to
characterise the expression of trophectoderm, embryonic and cancer
stem cell markers in HTR8/SVneo in comparison to JEG-3. Furthermore,
we characterize HTR8/SVneo cytogenetically to distinguish these cells
from others.
Methods: The expression of embryonic stem cell (ESC) transcription
markers, Notch1, Sox2, Oct4, Nanog and STAT3, and the trophoblast stem
cell (TSC) marker Cdx2 were identiﬁed per Western blot, immunocytochemistry and immunoﬂuorescence. Flow cytometry revealed expression
of CD24, CD34, CD44 and CD133, which are surface markers for progenitor
and cancer stem cells. LIF stimulation of stem cells maintains stemness,
and is used here to follow STAT3 activation.
Results: STAT3 is intensively, constitutively expressed in both cell lines.
Upon LIF stimulation, this molecule is found both in tyrosine (strong) and
serine (weak) phosphorylated forms. We detected all stem cell markers in
both cell lines. The surface marker expression proﬁle for HTR8/SVneo is
CD24low/CD34low/CD44high/CD133- , while JEG-3 cells are CD24low/CD34-/
CD44-/CD133-.
Conclusion: The constitutive expression of STAT3 in HTR8/SVneo is
probably SV-mediated, but the expression ESC and TSC markers suggest
that HTR8/SVneo has acquired progenitor characteristics through an
SVneo-transfection mediated back-differentiation. The surface marker
expression proﬁle of HTR8/SVneo is similar to that of several cancer stem
cells (e.g. breast, prostate), while that of JEG-3 rather indicates its metastatic derivation.
Grants: DIPUV (Universidad de Valparaiso, Chile; grant no. 24/2004;
12/2006; 07/2008; CI 5/2006). Programa de CONICYT/DAAD (190-2009);
Proyecto Anillo ACT73-CONICYT

Maja Weber1, Udo Jeschke2, Udo R Markert1, Justine S Fitzgerald1
1
Placentalab, Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Jena,
Germany, 2Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Munich, Germany
Objectives: Stem cells are highly proliferative, undifferentiated cells and
stem cell markers are involved in maintaining these characteristics. In the
blastocyst, differential expression between embryonic and trophoblast
stem cell transcription factors is thought to discriminate cell fate. Although
villous cytotrophoblasts are functionally considered a trophoblast stem
cell or at least a progenitor cell, which replenishes the outer syncytiotrophoblast layer when necessary, little data is available characterizing the
expression of stem cell transcription factors beyond the blastocyst stage.
We aimed to describe the expression of trophoblast and embryonal stem
cell factors in the placenta between 1st and 3rd trimester in order to
discriminate if these markers might be involved in progenitor cell
functions.
Methods: We analyzed 8 each of samples derived from 1st trimester
(elective abortions) and control (normal term pregnancy placentae). We
accomplished immunoperoxidase staining to detect the stem cell markers:
Cdx2 (trophectoderm), Sox2, Notch1, Nanog and Oct4A (embryonal).
Results: We detected all stem cell markers in all samples of 1st trimester
placentae. The expression pattern is homogenous in syncytio- and cytotrophoblast in early pregnancy and grows increasingly mosaic-like
towards the end of the 1st trimester. It appears that the syncytiotrophoblast loses the signal ﬁrst. The signals are lost or starkly diminished in the
3rd trimester. Here only singular, apparently cytotrophoblast, cells express
these markers.
Conclusion: Unexpectedly, both embryonic, as well as trophoblast stem
cell markers are expressed in the ﬁrst trimester trophoblast and appears
most vivid among the villous trophoblast of very early pregnancy. Loss of
stem cell transcription factor expression in term placentae indicates
temporal regulation, and probably a speciﬁc function which is yet to be
elucidated. Association of stem cell factor expression with reproductive
pathologies should constitute the aim of further projects.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A57

P1.82

P1.83

CHARACTERIZATION OF MESENCHYMAL STEM CELL LINES
FROM THE HUMAN PLACENTA AND DECIDUA BY
MEASUREMENT OF THE NOVEL STEMNESS MARKER,
ALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE (ALDH)

ISOLATION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF CELLS OF THE YOLK
SAC AND EQUINE AMNIOTIC MEMBRANE AS A SOURCE FOR
CELLULAR THERAPY

Gina Kusuma1, Sharon Qin1, Mohamed Abumaree2, Sandra Isenmann3,
Stan Gronthos3, Evdokia Dimitriadis4, Shaun Brennecke1, Bill Kalionis1
1
University of Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology and
Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre, Royal
Women’s Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 2King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for
Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Division of Haematology, I.M.V.S./
Hanson Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia, 4Embryo Implantation Laboratory, Prince Henry’s Institute of Medical Research, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia
Objectives: During pregnancy there is a high state of oxidative stress in the
placenta and decidua. Placenta-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
reside in vascular niches and are exposed to circulating oxidative stress
response products. ALDH activity is a widely used “universal” marker for
stem cells. ALDH efﬁciently detoxiﬁes aldehyde products generated by
reactive oxygen species, which is necessary for stem cell survival. Our aim
was to isolate placental and decidual MSC lines, and characterise them
with respect to their ALDH activity.
Method: Primary chorionic MSCs (CMSC) and decidual MSCs (DMSC) were
transformed with the human telomerase reverse transcriptase gene
(hTERT) to generate CMSC29 and DMSC23 lines. In vitro differentiation
into mesenchymal lineages was performed with commercial kits. Flow
cytometry was performed with well-established MSC markers. Cell lines
were tested for decidualization by ELISA. The commercial “Aldeﬂuor” ﬂow
cytometry assay was used to detect cells with high ALDH activity (ALDHbr
cells).
Results: Both cell lines showed >95% expression of MSC markers CD73,
CD105, CD90, CD44, CD146, CD166 and lacked expression of (<2% positive)
CD45, CD19, HLA-DR as expected. Both cell lines could be differentiated
into osteocytes, adipocytes and chondrocytes. Only DMSC23 showed
increased prolactin (decidual marker) levels in the decidualization assay.
The proportion of ALDHbr was signiﬁcantly lower in CMSC29 compared
with DMSC23 (CMSC29 0.17%0.07%; DMSC23 5.20%1.14%, unpaired
t-test, P<0.01, n¼3). A similar result was obtained in primary CMSC
and DMSC populations CMSCs 0.03%0.02%; DMSCs 5.67%1.72%,
unpaired t-test, P<0.05, n¼6)
Conclusion: The establishment of CMSC29 and DMSC23 will assist stem
cell culture studies by providing uniform populations of chorionic and
decidual MSCs respectively. The signiﬁcantly lower proportion of ALDHbr
cells in CMSC29 compared with DMSC23, which was also found in primary
CMSCs and DMSCs respectively, may reﬂect the very different oxidative
stress environments of the two stem cell types.

Andre Luis Franciolli, Graciela Pignatari, Paula Fratini, Dayane Alcantara,
Isabella Fernandes, Fabiele Russo, Marcio Rodrigues, Patricia Beltrao-Braga,
Maria Angelica Miglino
University of Sao Paulo-FMVZ, Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil
Stem cells derived from extra-fetal sources may represent attractive
alternative candidates, with potential use cellular therapy, giving new
perspectives for developmental biology and regenerative medicine.
Objectives: The aim of this work was isolate and characterize horse stem
cells from the yolk sac (YS) and amniotic membrane (AM), and to deﬁne
the biological properties of these cells.
Methods: The vitelline and amniotic fragments were cultured in a-MEM,
supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum, 1% nonessential amino acids,
1% glutamine and 1% antibiotic, incubated at 37  C and 5% CO2.
Results: The stem cells isolated from the YS and the AM, in the ﬁfth
passage (P5), showed normal karyotype (2n ¼ 64). The cells from YS
membrane showed a progressive growth, not constant until the P5, and
start decline in P10. For the AM, the cell population showed progressive
growth with peaks, until the P8, and a marked decline in P10. In immunocytochemistry, the yolk sac cells and amniotic membranes showed
positive reaction for: Oct3/4, Nanog, SSEA-3, vimentin, cytokeratin 18
(CK18) and PCNA3. Either the YS as the AM expressed the markers CD45,
CD105, Oct3/4, Nanog, CD34 and Stro-1. Both cell lines demonstrated the
capacity to differentiate into adipocytes, osteocytes and chondrocytes and
had no carcinogenic potential in NUDE mice.
Conclusion: Based on the results above, the cells of the yolk sac and
amniotic membrane, showed plasticity and potential to cell differentiation.
In addition, these cells could be an interesting source and a valuable for
future assays involving cellular therapy in Regenerative Veterinary
Medicine.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A58

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.84

P1.85

DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF PROGESTERONE ON COX-2 AND
MN-SOD EXPRESSIONS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH HISTONE
ACETYLATION STATUS OF THE PROMOTER REGION IN HUMAN
ENDOMETRIAL STROMAL CELLS

BIRTH WEIGHT AND DIFFERENCES OF 11b-HYDROXYSTEROID
DEHYDROGENASE TYPE 1 AND 2 GENE EXPRESSION IN
PLACENTAS OF JAPANESE WOMEN ENROLLED IN HAMAMATSU
BIRTH COHORT FOR MOTHER AND CHILDREN STUDY (HBC)

Isao Tamura, Norihiro Sugino
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yamaguchi University Graduate
School of Medicine, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine,,
Minamikogushi 1-1-1, Ube, Japan, Japan

Keiko Muramatsu1, Yukiko Kobayashi Kohmura1, Kaori Yamazaki1, Kotomi
Nagahashi1, Toshiyuki Uchida1, Kazunao Suzuki1, Kazuhiro Sugihara1,
Hiroaki Itoh1, Kenji Tuchiya1,2, Noriyoshi Takei1,2, Naohiro Kanayama1
1
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Hamamatsu, Japan, 2Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Research Center for Child Mental Development, Hamamatsu, Japan

Objective: In the human endometrium, endometrial stromal cells (ESC)
are exposed to cytokines. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is a cytokineinducible enzyme controlling synthesis of prostaglandins, which are
responsible for endometrial shedding. Manganese superoxide dismutase
(Mn-SOD) is another cytokine-inducible gene, and protects cells by scavenging superoxide radicals. ESC are also regulated by progesterone during
the secretory phase. The present study investigated the mechanism by
which TNFa and progesterone affect the expression of COX-2 and Mn-SOD
in ESC.
Methods: ESC were incubated with TNFa and progesterone. COX-2 and
Mn-SOD mRNA expressions were determined by real-time RT-PCR. NF-kB
binding to the promoter region or histone acetylation status of the NF-kB
response element was analyzed by a chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay.
Results: TNFa increased COX-2 and Mn-SOD mRNA levels. Progesterone
(10-6 M) suppressed TNFa-induced COX-2 mRNA expression whereas
TNFa-induced Mn-SOD expression was not inhibited by progesterone. The
inhibitory effect of progesterone was abolished by knock-down of
progesterone receptors by siRNA. ChIP assay revealed that TNFa increased
NF-kB binding at both the COX-2 promoter and the Mn-SOD enhancer, and
that progesterone only inhibited the NF-kB binding at the COX-2 promoter.
The histone acetylation level of the NF-kB response element of the MnSOD enhancer was lower than that of the COX-2 promoter. However,
when histone acetylation was induced by histone deacetylase inhibitors,
progesterone inhibited the TNFa-induced NF-kB binding to the Mn-SOD
enhancer.
Conclusions: TNFa increased COX-2 and Mn-SOD expression via NF-kB
activation. Progesterone inhibited COX-2 expression by inhibiting the
binding of NF-kB to its response element, but did not inhibit TNFa-induced
Mn-SOD expression. The gene-speciﬁc action of progesterone may be due
to the difference in chromatin structure at the NF-kB response elements in
the COX-2 promoter and Mn-SOD enhancer.

Objectives: Fetal exposure to maternal glucocorticoids is hypothesized to
affect various aspects of fetal growth and development; however, the longterm effect is yet to be fully clariﬁed. The 11b- hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD)s enzymes regulate maternal as well as fetal glucocorticoids
activity in the placenta and play a pivotal role in the determination of
glucocorticoids activities in fetal circulation all though the course of fetal
development. The 11b-HSDs have two isoenzymes; 11b-HSD1 forms active
cortisol from inactive cortisone, while 11b-HSD2 works inversely. The
purpose of the present study is to investigate the association between the
gene expression of 11b-HSD1 and 11b-HSD2 in placentas and birth weight,
infantile growth and development.
Methods: Forty-two placentas were collected from Japanese pregnant
women during cesarean section due to obstetrical indication at 31-40
week of gestation. They were enrolled in Hamamatsu Birth Cohort for
Mother and Children Study (HBC) and growth and development of their
children are going to be followed until 4 years old under informed consent.
Each birth weight was assessed by the formula of [(birth weight)-(mean
birth weight)] / standard deviation (SD) of body weight ¼ Z-score at birth
by using centile charts for birth weight for gestational age in Japanese
singleton births. 11b-HSD1 and 2 gene expression was measured by
quantitative RT-PCR
Results: The 11b-HSD1 mRNA levels were positively correlated with
Z-scores of birth weight (r¼0.30, p<0.05), but not placental weight. By
contrast, 11b-HSD2 mRNA levels correlated with Z-scores of neither birth
nor placental weight.
Conclusion: Positive correlation was observed between birth weight and
gene expression of 11b-HSD1, suggesting a possibility that placental
metabolism of glucocorticoids might take part in the regulation of fetal,
not placental, growth. The association of placental expression of 11b-HSD1
gene and infantile growth and development is now under investigation in
HBC study team.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.86

P1.87

THROMBIN ENHANCES SOLUBLE FMS-LIKE TYROSINE KINASE 1
EXPRESSION IN TROPHOBLASTS d POSSIBLE INVOLVEMENT IN
THE PATHOGENESIS OF PREECLAMPSIA

EFFECT ON THE PRODUCTION OF PLGF AND SVGFR1 FROM
PRIMARY TROPHOBLAST BY CYTOKINE AND TLR LIGAND

Yin Zhao1,2, Kaori Koga2, Yutaka Osuga2, Miwako Nagai2, Gentaro Izuim2,
Yuji Taketani2
1
Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, WuHan, HuBei, China, 2University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan,
Japan
Objectives: To investigate the possible impact of thrombin on soluble fmslike tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) expression in trophoblasts.
Methods: Trophoblast cell line (HRT-8/SVneo, H8) was treated with
thrombin, protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR-1) speciﬁc agonist SFLLERN
and thrombin antagonist PPACK. mRNA expression of slft-1, Vascular
Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) and Placental Growth Factor (PlGF) in
trophoblasts using real-time PCR. The secretion of sFlt-1, VEGF and PlGF
protein from trophoblasts, using Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assay
(ELISA).
Results: Administration of thrombin (10U/ml) and PAR-1 speciﬁc agonist
SFLLRN (300 mM) increased sFlt-1 mRNA expression (4.24  0.74 and
4.21  0.79 fold, respectively, P < 0.05 for both) and protein secretion
(5.08  0.42 fold, P < 0.001 and 1.89  0.16 fold, P < 0.05, respectively) in
H8. The induction of sFlt-1 protein secretion by thrombin was dose
dependent. The effect of thrombin was completely reduced by thrombin
inhibitor PPACK. Thrombin increased mRNA expression of VEGF (P < 0.05)
but did not change VEGF secretion and PlGF mRNA expression and
secretion.
Conclusion: During placental development, thrombin, generated in the
local hemorrhage in the utero-placenta increase trophoblasts expression
of sFlt-1. Consequently, thrombin may contribute to the pathogenesis of
preeclampsia.

A59

Erina Kato, Yusuke Kobayashi, Go Ichikawa, Takayuki Murase, Fumihisa
Chishima, Mami Suzuki, Tatsuo Yamamoto
Nihon University, 30-1,OoyaguchiKamicho,Itabashi,Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: The TNF-a and IFN-gamma such cytokines play an important
role in maintenance of the pregnancy and the abnormal pregnancy. Tool
like receptors also innate immune response during pregnancy. PlGF is
a vascular endothelial growth factor derived from placenta. sVEGFR1 is its
soluble receptor and regulate the PlGF function. To elucidate action of
cytokine and TLR ligand to angiogenic and antiangiogenic factor in
trophoblast, we examined the effect on the production of PlGF and sVGFR1
from primary trophoblast by cytokine and TLR ligand
Methods: Villous tissues were obtained from healthy pregnant women
aged 16 to 36 years who asked artiﬁcial abortion at 7 to 11 weeks’ gestation
with the informed consent. The trophoblasts were isolated from early
pregnant villous tissues and cultured with serum-free medium. Subsequently, trophoblasts were treated with TNF-a and IFN-gamma and TLR
ligand (TLR 1-9) for 24 hours. The levels of PlGF and sVEGFR1 were
measured by ELISA.
Results: The production of PlGF in the primary trophoblast increased by
adding TNF-alpha and INF-gamma. The sVEGFR1 production increased by
adding INF-gamma. Increased sVEGFR1 was found by adding TLR-9 ligand.
Concluson: The TNF-alpha and INF-gamma may promote PlGF and
sVEGFR1 production. Moreover TLR ligand also may relate the production
of sVEGFR1. Cytokines such as TNF-alpha and INF-gamma and TLR ligand
may work for placentation and maintenance of pregnancy.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A60

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.88

P1.89

EFFECT ON THE PRODUCTION OF SOLUBLE ENDOGLIN FROM
TROPHOBLAST AND CHORIOCARCINOMA CELLS BY IGG TAKEN
FROM PREECLAMPSIA SERA

INTERPLAY BETWEEN IGF AND EGF SIGNALING DURING
PROLIFERATION AND MIGRATION OF BOVINE PLACENTAL
CELLS IN VITRO

Yusuke kobayashi, Erina Kato, Hiromitu Azuma, Fumihisa Chishima,
Manami Suzuki, Tatsuo Yamamoto
Nihon University, Tokyo, Japan

Lisa Lenz, Nina Hambruch, Sarah Fuchs, Christiane Pfarrer
Department of Anatomy, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover,
Hannover, Germany

Objectives: The soluble endoglin (sEng) is an antiangiogenic protein
that may inhibit TGF-b1 signaling and endothelial nitric oxide synthase
activation in endothelial cells. The levels of sEng increased in sera obtained
from preeclampsia. The factors that increase the sEng in preeclampsia have
not been known well. In preeclampsia many autoantibodies such as
anti phospholipid, anti endothelial antibody, anti angiotensin receptor
agonistic antibody and others were reported. To investigate the factors that
may increase sEng in preeclampsia, we examined the effect of IgG taken
from preeclampsia sera on the production of sEng and expression of sEng
mRNA from trophoblast and choriocarcinoma cells.
Methods: Serum samples were taken from women with normal pregnancy
and with preeclampsia. IgGs were elluted by Protein G afﬁnity chromatography. Villous tissues were obtained from healthy pregnant women
who had artiﬁcial abortion from 7 to 11 weeks’ gestation with the
informed consent. The primary ﬁrst trimester trophoblast and choriocarcinoma (JEG-3) cells were cultured with IgG fraction for 24 hrs, and the
sEng levels in supernatants and expression of sEng mRNA in those cells
were evaluated.
Results: The addition of preeclampsia IgG into primary trophoblast and
JEG-3 cells led to increased release of sEng. IgG fraction obtained from
preeclampsia sera increased the expression of sEng mRNA in JEG-3 cells.
Conclusion: The results suggest that the IgG taken from preeclampsia
sera may increase the protein production of sEng and mRNA expression of
sEng from trophoblast and JEG-3 cells without hypoxia. IgG fraction in
preeclampsia sera may play a role of high level of serum sEng in
preeclampsia patients.

Objectives: Growth, invasion and angiogenesis are important processes in
placentae of different species which are regulated by growth factors such
as EGF (epidermal growth factor) and IGFI/II (insulin-like growth factor
I/II). Like cancer cells, bovine trophoblast cells undergo epithelialmesenchymal-transition thereby differentiating into migrating trophoblast giant cells which invade the caruncular epithelium. As motility and
proliferation are basic mechanisms for the restricted invasion we have
investigated the inﬂuence of IGFI, IGFII and EGF (alone and in combination)
on these events.
Methods: Bovine caruncular epithelial cells (BCEC-12), bovine placental
ﬁbroblasts and bovine trophoblast cells (F3) were stimulated with IGFI
(50/100ng/ml), IGFIþEGF (50/100þ20ng/ml), EGF (20ng/ml), IGFII
(50/100ng/ml) and IGFIIþEGF (50/100þ20ng/ml). Cell proliferation was
examined by MTT-Assay, motility by live-cell-imaging and signal transduction by phosphorylation-analysis of MAPK (mitogen-activated protein
kinase) 42/44. Statistical signiﬁcance was conﬁrmed using Turkey’s
difference test (p<0.05).
Results: We observed a signiﬁcant increase in proliferation after stimulation with IGFI, IGFIþEGF and IGFIIþEGF in all cell lines. Incubation with
IGFII elevated proliferation of F3 and ﬁbroblasts, whereas EGF alone only
had a signiﬁcant effect on F3. A signiﬁcantly enhanced motility occurred
after stimulation with IGFI or IGFIIþEGF in all three cell lines; after
treatment with EGF or IGFIþEGF in BCEC-12 and F3 and due to IGFII
treatment in BCEC-12 and ﬁbroblasts. Western Blot revealed that stimulation with EGF, IGFIþEGF and IGFIIþEGF increased MAPK phosphorylation
in all cell lines, though to a highly varying degree. IGFI showed an
activating effect in F3 and ﬁbroblasts. No increase in phosphorylation was
observed for IGFII.
Conclusion: Our in vitro study provides evidence that IGFI/II and EGF play
an important role in proliferation and motility in bovine placental cells
suggesting a similar action in vivo. Further analysis of the interplay
between the IGF- and EGF-systems will help to understand the delicate
regulation of placenta development and function.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A61

P1.90

P1.91

CHARACTERIZATION OF THE INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH
FACTOR (IGF) SYSTEM IN THE UTEROPLACENTAL
UNIT OF COWS NEAR TERM

STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF RARE
MISSENSE MUTATIONS IN HUMAN CHORIONIC
GONADOTROPIN b-SUBUNIT

Hanna Luetkehus1, Rebecca Froehlich1, Nina Hambruch1, Marion
Piechotta1,2, Heinrich Bollwein1,2, Christiane Pfarrer1
1
Department of Anatomy, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover,
Hannover, Germany, 2Clinic for Cattle, University of Veterinary Medicine
Hannover, Hannover, Germany


Liina Nagirnaja1, Ceslovas
Venclovas2, Kristiina Rull1,3, Kim C. Jonas4,
4
Hellevi Peltoketo , Ole B. Christiansen5,6, Visvaldas Kairys2, Gaily Kivi7,
Rudi Steffensen8, Ilpo T. Huhtaniemi4, Maris Laan1
1
Human Molecular Genetics Research Group, Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of Biotechnology,
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Surgery
and Cancer, Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Imperial
College London, London, UK, 5The Fertility Clinics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Aalborg
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 7Icosagen Cell Factory OÜ, Tartu, Estonia,
8
Department of Clinical Immunology, Aalborg Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark

Objectives: Fertility of high producing dairy cows is frequently compromised by post partum metritis since uterine and ovarian function are
affected by the ongoing infection. Despite a common bacterial contamination of the uterus after parturition, only a subgroup of the cows develops
clinical signs of a metritis. This is regularly followed by longer calving
intervals, which have been associated with a negative energy balance and
altered blood insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) concentrations. Consequently, we aimed to examine whether IGF-I could be involved in the
development of metritis, and if there is a correlation between blood IGF-I
level and local uteroplacental expression of IGF system members.
Methods: Placentomal (P) and interplacentomal (IP) tissue samples were
taken at caesarean sections on day 275 p.i. from 17 healthy, pregnant
Holstein Friesian cows, which had a similar body condition score. Groups
were formed according to the prepartum blood IGF-I levels (IGF-I high
[n¼10] and IGF-I low [n¼7]). IGF-I, IGF-II, IGF1R, IGF2R, and IGF binding
proteins (BP) -2, -3, and -7 were localized via immunohistochemistry in P
and IP regions.
Results: In P areas IGF-II, IGF2R, IGFBP-2, and IGFBP-7 were mostly
localized in the maternal epithelium, whereas IGF-I occurred mainly in the
maternal stroma. The expression of IGFBP-3 was ubiquitous in this region,
while IGF1R was primarily found in fetal and maternal blood vessels. In IP
areas all analyzed proteins predominantly immunostained the maternal
luminal and glandular epithelia. IGF-I alone was also found in maternal
stroma. No differences in expression were observed between the IGF-I
high and IGF-I low groups.
Conclusion: In conclusion, IGF-I blood levels were not related to the local
expression patterns of the IGF system members. Speciﬁc functions in the
uteroplacental unit are supported by the distinct localization of IGF system
components in particular cell types. Funded by Pﬁzer Inc.

Objectives: Heterodimeric human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is one of
the key hormones determining early pregnancy success. We have previously identiﬁed rare missense mutations in hCGb genes (CGB5 p.Val56Leu,
CGB8 p.Arg8Trp and p.Pro73Arg) with potential pathophysiological
importance. Current study aimed to determine the prevalence of these
mutations in Northern Europe and assess their structural and functional
consequences by applying a combination of in silico and in vitro
approaches.
Methods: Carrier status of each mutation was determined for 655 recurrent miscarriage (RM) patients and 431 healthy controls from Northern
Europe using PCR-RFLP. The impact of the mutations on the protein
dynamics and assembly of hCG was predicted with in silico structural and
molecular dynamics analysis. The dimerization quality of mutated and
wild-type hCGb was assessed in vitro using co-immunoprecipitation and
immunoassays. Bioactivity of the hCG variants was estimated by
measuring hLH/CG receptor mediated cAMP signaling.
Results: Mutation CGB5 p.Val56Leu was identiﬁed in a single heterozygous
RM patient and it caused a structural hindrance in the hCGa/b dimerization. Although only 10% of the mutant hCGb was assembled into intact hCG
compared to the wild-type, a stronger signaling response was triggered
upon binding to its receptor, thus compensating the effect of poor
dimerization. Mutation CGB8 p.Pro73Arg was found with equal frequency
(0.46%) among RM patients and controls. Approximately 50% of secreted
p.Pro73Arg b-subunits acquired an alternative conformation but biological
activity of assembled hCG remained unaffected. For the CGB8 p.Arg8Trp
substitution, the applied methods revealed no structural or functional
alterations.
Conclusions: Although two studied mutations alter the conformation or
assembly of hCG, the overall functional characteristics of the hormone
remain unaffected. Considering our and previously published data on
missense mutations in CGB genes, we propose that only mutations with
neutral or mild functional consequences might be tolerated in the major
hCGb genes CGB5 and CGB8.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A62

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.92

P1.93

FETAL GROWTH RESTRICTING EFFECTS OF A SINGLE COURSE OF
ANTENATAL BETAMETHASONE IN WOMEN: ROLE OF HUMAN
PLACENTAL LACTOGEN

PROTEOMICS ANALYSIS OF ESTROGEN RESPONSIVE
MITOCHONDRIAL PROTEIN S-NITROSYLATION VIA
MITOCHONDRIAL ENOS IN HUMAN UMBILICAL
CORD VEIN ENDOTHELIAL CELLS

Thorsten Braun1,2, Anett Husar1, Deborah Sloboda3,4, John Challis5, Andreas
Plagemann1,2, Joachim Dudenhausen1
1
Department of Obstetrics, Charité University Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2AG
Perinatal Programming, , Charité University Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3The
Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, and The National Research Centre
for Growth and Development, Auckland, New Zealand, 4Department of
Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Canada, 5Department of Physiology and Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Objectives: Betamethasone (BET) is widely used as a treatment of women
who are at high risk of preterm birth. In sheep BET-induced growth
restriction was associated with reduced placenta lactogen (PL), a key
regulator of fetal growth. We therefore investigated antenatal BET
treatment effects in humans on birth weight and PL.
Methods: BET (single course of 2x12mg, normally grown fetuses between
23þ5-34þ0wks) exposed women (n¼46) who delivered between 23þ542þ0wks were compared to gestational age-matched controls (n¼50).
Maternal blood samples were obtained before, during and after BET
treatment and at the time of birth. BET effects on fetal anthropometrics,
placental morphometry and placental PL protein levels were analysed by
univariate analyses of variance with gestational age and treatment as
cofactors.
Results: BET signiﬁcantly decreased birth weight -16.8%, head circumference -8.6% and body length -6.0% compared to controls. Placental basal
plate size -18.2% and placenta thickness -11.1% were signiﬁcantly reduced
after BET treatment in fetuses born 37þ0wks. Placenta weight was
unaffected. BET treatment signiﬁcantly reduced PL-positive syncytiotrophoblast nucleus number but increased nucleus circumference þ6.2%
and nucleus surface area þ12.3% in central regions of the placenta
compared to controls. These changes were associated with BET induced
increases in placental PL protein levels þ11.1%. Maternal plasma hPL levels
were not affected. Birth weight only weakly correlated with maternal
plasma PL levels.
Conclusion: A single course of BET treatment reduced birth weight and
affected placental size and thickness. Similar to our sheep model, reduced
PL syncytiotrophoblast nucleus number was associated with an increase in
cell size, and increased PL protein levels in the placenta but did not result
in increased placental hPL output into the maternal circulation. PL is a key
regulator in both placental and fetal development late in gestation and
appears to be vulnerable to GC exposure at this time.

Seiro Satohisa1, Hong-hai Zhang1, Ying-ying Yang1, Lan Huang2, Dong-bao
Chen1
1
Ob/Gyn, UC Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA, 2Physiol & Biophy, UC Irvine, Irvine, CA,
USA
Objectives: Mitochondria are known to be the primary subcellular
organelle that nitric oxide (NO) targets in many cells. We have recently
shown that estrogens stimulate dynamic protein S-nitrosylation (SNO) in
endothelial cells. However, the effects of estrogens on global mitochondrial protein SNO are unknown. In this study, we determined if estrogen
stimulates mitochondrial protein SNO and if yes, to identify the estrogen
responsive mitochondrial nitroso-proteins and to test if it occurs via
mitochondrial endothelial NO synthase (eNOS).
Methods: Human umbilical cord vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were
treated with estradiol-17b (E2, 10 nM) or nitrosoglutathione (GSNO, 1mM)
for 20 min. The cells were ﬁxed and SNO-proteins were labeled by biotin
switch (BST) and visualized with ﬂuorescently labeled subcellular
organelle trackers by ﬂuorescence microscopy. Mitochondrial proteins
were puriﬁed using the magnetic microbeads and subjected to BST. Levels
of SNO proteins were determined by immunoblotting with anti-biotin
antibody. The biotin-labeled mitochondrial SNO proteins were tryptically
digested for capturing the biotin-labeled SNO-peptides using avidincoated beads and identiﬁed by Mass Spectrometry. Mitochondrial,
membrane, or Golgi targeted eNOS was overexpressed in HUVEC for
investigating the effects of subcellular NO production on E2-stimulated
SNO.
Results: E2 and GSNO signiﬁcantly stimulated mitochondrial protein SNO.
Mitochondria were mainly labeled in situ with the greatest protein SNO
response to estrogen and GSNO. Proteomics analysis of the SNO-peptides
identiﬁed 12, 33 and 57 SNO-proteins in the mitochondrial proteomes in
control, E2- and GSNO- treated HUVEC, respectively. Function analysis
suggested that SNO-proteins are associated with various mitochondrial
functions, including apoptosis, energy and redox regulation, iron homeostasis, etc. E2 stimulated protein SNO was enhanced by overexpression of
mitochondrial or Golgi, but not membrane, targeted eNOS in HUVEC.
Conclusion: Estrogen rapidly stimulates protein SNO in endothelial
mitochondria via mitochondrial eNOS, implicating mitochondrial protein
SNO to be crucial for mediating the vasoprotective effects of estrogens.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A63

P1.94

P1.95

CHANGES IN BLOOD MACROPHAGE COLONY-STIMULATING
FACTOR CONCENTRATION AFTER ARTIFICIAL INDUCTION OF
ABORTION IN JAPANESE BLACK COWS

RAP1, A SMALL GTP BINDING PROTEIN, MEDIATES EGF AND
HB-EGF SIGNALING AND REGULATES EGF RECEPTOR IN AN
EXTRAVILLOUS TROPHOBLAST CELL LINE

Kazunaga Oshima1, Kazuhiro Yoshihara2, Takatoshi Kojima1, Naoyuki
Yamamoto1
1
NARO Western Region Agricultural Research Center, Oda, Shimane, Japan,
2
National Institute of Animal Health, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan

Mikihiro Yoshie1, Kazuya Kusama1, Kensuke Ohishi1, Kazuhiro Tamura1,
Masahiko Kutsukake1, Eiichi Tachikawa1, Hirotaka Nishi2, Keiichi Isaka2
1
Department of Endocrine Pharmacology, Tokyo University of Pharmacy &
Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan

Objectives: Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) appears to play
an important role in the maintenance of pregnancy in cows. Blood M-CSF
concentration varies with the day of pregnancy in normal pregnant cows.
The objective of this study was to investigate the changes in blood M-CSF
concentration and the relationship between M-CSF and sex steroid
hormone concentrations after artiﬁcial induction of abortion during the
middle period of pregnancy in cows.
Methods: Five pregnant Japanese Black cows were used in this study. They
were administered cloprostenol (PGA) to induce abortion between 91–103
days of pregnancy. The fetal status was monitored by ultrasonography, and
blood was collected for estimating M-CSF, estrogen (E2) and progesterone
(P4) concentration. M-CSF concentration was measured by the enzymelinked immunosorbent assay and E2 and P4 concentrations were
measured by time-resolved ﬂuorometry. M-CSF concentration was taken
as a response variable, while the number of days after initial PGA
administration, E2 and P4 concentrations, and ovarian dynamics (the
growth and regression of corpus luteum and dominant follicle) were taken
as explanatory variables. The relationship between M-CSF concentration
and explanatory variables was analyzed using a generalized linear model
assuming that the response variable was followed by gamma distribution
and a logarithmic link function.
Results: The pattern of the changes in M-CSF concentration varied in
the cows. The relationship between explanatory variables and M-CSF
concentration was different for each cow.
Conclusion: Blood M-CSF concentration may not change with a certain
pattern after artiﬁcial induction of abortion. Furthermore, P4 and E2
concentrations and ovarian dynamics may not play a central role in
changing blood M-CSF concentration after artiﬁcial abortion induction.

Extravillous trophoblasts (EVT) invade into endometrium to establish the
feto-maternal interaction which is essential for maintenance of pregnancy
and fetal development. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) and heparinbinding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF) bind to their receptors (EGFR)
and stimulate EVT proliferation and invasion through activation of phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signaling pathways.
Objective: We examined possible roles of small GTP-binding protein Rap1
in EGF or HB-EGF-mediated EVT proliferation and invasion.
Methods: EVT cell line (HTR8/SVneo) was stimulated with EGF or HB-EGF
and Rap1 activation (GTP-Rap1) was examined by pull-down assay. Effect
of siRNA mediated Rap1 knockdown on serum-, EGF- or HB-EGF-stimulate
EVT proliferation and invasion was assessed by the WST-8 assay and the
transwell assay, respectively. In addition, effect of Rap1 knockdown on the
activation of EGF signaling pathways and the expression of EGFR were
examined by immunoblotting and real-time RT-PCR.
Results: EGF or HB-EGF increased the amount of active form of Rap1
(GTP-Rap1) in HTR8/SVneo. Serum-, EGF- or HB-EGF-stimulated proliferation and invasion were signiﬁcantly abrogated in Rap1 siRNA transfected
cells. Knockdown of Rap1 inhibited EGF- or HB-EGF-induced phosphorylation of AKT, ERK1/2 and p38MAPK. Furthermore, Rap1 knockdown
signiﬁcantly decreased EGFR protein level but not its mRNA level.
Conclusions: These results suggest that Rap1 may function as a mediator
of EGF signaling pathway and a regulator of EGFR protein level in EVT.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A64

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.96

P1.97

THE EFFECT OF STEROID HORMONES ON THE PROLIFERATION
ABILITY AND ANGIOGENIC DIFFERENTIATION OF HUMAN
PLACENTA-DERIVED MESENCHYMAL STEM CELLS

SYNEPITHELIOCHORIAL PLACENTAL INTERACTIONS IN EGFP
CLONED CATTLE MODEL

Meitsz Su1, Lynn Huang2, Paolin Kuo1
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Cheng-Kung
University Hospital, Tainan city, Taiwan, 2Institute of Biotechnology,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan city, Taiwan
Objectives: Gender difference seemed to exist in MSCs on the recovery
from cardiac infarction, acute inﬂammation, and osteogenic differentiation. In general, female-derived MSCs have better cell proliferation and cell
differentiation ability compared with male-derived MSCs. Limited information was available to explore the effect of sex hormones on MSCs’ ability
of angiogenic differentiation. Therefore, we explored if sex hormones and
their antagonists interfere the cell proliferation and angiogenic differentiation abilities of human placenta-derived MSC (PDMSCs).
Materials and Methods:

(A) Sex hormones’ effects on MSC proliferation: PDMSCs were
isolated from human term placenta tissue, and were used to
assess the characteristics of MSC at passage 5. PDMSCs were
exposed to culture medium (DMEM-LG) supplemented with
different concentrations of sex hormones. When cell growth
reached subconﬂuence, cell number was analyzed by cell
counting.
(B) Induction of MSC into angiogenic differentiation:
P5-PDMSCs were cultured with induction medium (EGM-2)
supplemented with different concentrations of sex hormone
for 14 and 21 days. Total RNA was extracted, reversetranscribed to cDNA and quantiﬁed as standard procedure.
KDR, vWF, CD31 were used as markers of angiogenic differentiation by real-time PCR.
Results:
In this study, our ﬁndings are summarized as below:

(1) Although estrogen did not promote MSC proliferation, its
antagonist (ICI-182 780) inhibited cell proliferation. Both
estrogen and its antagonist did not have signiﬁcant effect on
angiogenic differentiation of PDMSCs. (Fig 1)
(2) Progesterone promoted cell growth, whereas its antagonist
(mifepristone) inhibited cell proliferation (Fig 2). Progesterone,
in another way, inhibited angiogenic differentiation, but
mifepristone reversed the effect and further promoted MSCs’
angiogenic differentiation. (Fig 3A, 3B)
(3) Testosterone increased proliferation of PDMSCs, and also
enhanced angiogenic differentiation. (Fig 4A, 4B)

Lilian J Oliveira1, Rodrigo Barreto1, Fabiana Bressan1, Flávio V Meirelles1,
Maria Angelica Miglino1, Flávia T V Pereira2
1
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil, 2Paulista State University
UNESP, Dracena, Sao Paulo, Brazil
Objective: To investigate the mechanisms by foetal cells interact and
transfer their contents to the maternal compartment in the bovine
placenta using a model of cloned transgenic enhanced Green Fluorescent
Protein (eGFP) expressing bovine embryos.
Methods: EGFP-expressing embryos were produced and transfer into
surrogate cow. The uteri were surgically recovered at days 60 (N¼3) and 90
(N¼3) of pregnancy. Placentome/endometrium samples and maternal
peripheral blood leukocyte (PBL) samples were collected to assess the
presence of fDNA by nested-PCR for eGFP and testis-speciﬁc Y-encoded
protein (TSPY), immunohistochemistry, transmission electron microscopy
and western blotting analysis.
Results: eGFP DNA was present in PBL at day 60 and 90 of pregnancy
conﬁrming that there is transplacental transfer of fDNA to the mother.
Interestingly, eGFP was found to be present at protein and DNA levels in
the intercaruncular epithelium, suggesting that eGFP is delivered to the
maternal side even in the regions where the cells are loosely attached.
Moreover, at local level eGFP was highly expressed by the trophoblast;
however it was also present in the uterine epithelium (UE) facing the
trophoblast. In the arcade zone at the syncytial plaques, the expression of
eGFP by both tissues was less intense than in the neighbouring cells. Our
eGFP construct possessed an ubiquitin promoter. Ubiquitin is not
expressed by invasive cells in human, which might explain the weak
staining of eGFP in the syncytial plaques. Additionally, trophoblast cells
closer to UE showed decreased cytoplasmic area and ﬂattened nucleus,
suggesting that maternal cells respond to foetal signals undergoing to
apoptosis.
Conclusion: Our results showed that the eGFP is delivered to maternal
side at local and systemic levels. Since eGFP does not have a signal peptide,
it is suggested that eGFP could be delivered to the maternal side through
transtrophoblastic water channels that are present in the ruminant
placenta.

Conclusion: Sex hormones (estrogen, progesterone and androgen)
promote cell proliferation of PDMSC in some situations and interfere their
angiogenic differentiation. Progesterone inhibited angiogenic differentiation of PDMSC, but testosterone enhanced the ability. In conclusion, sex
hormones affect the abilities of cell proliferations and angiogenic
differentiation of PDMSC in different way.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.98

P1.99

IGF-II ANALOGUE ENHANCES PLACENTAL EFFICIENCY &
REDUCES FETAL WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION IN NORMAL MICE

PLACENTAL DEVELOPMENT IN NECROMYS LASIURUS
(RODENTIA, CRICETIDAE) - FUNCTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
USING STEREOLOGICAL APPROACH

Jayne Charnock, Mark Dilworth, John Aplin, Colin Sibley, Melissa
Westwood, Ian Crocker
The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Objectives: Insulin-like growth factors (IGF-I & IGF–II) and their cell
surface receptors (IGF-R1 & IGF–R2) are critical regulators of fetal and
placental growth. Administering IGF-I or –II in pregnancy appears an
attractive therapeutic strategy for improving outcomes in fetal growth
restriction (FGR), but IGF receptors are ubiquitously expressed, with
potential off-target effects. An alternative approach is to enhance the
efﬁcacy of endogenous IGF already present at the materno-fetal interface.
This could be achieved by treatment with Leu27IGF-II, an IGF-II analogue
that binds the IGF-R2 clearance receptor, thus blocking IGF-II removal,
allowing IGF-II to bind IGF-R1, thereby promoting its downstream effects.
Previous studies in the guinea pig suggest that such treatment improves
fetal weight (Sferruzzi-Perri et al 2008). Here we have investigated the
effects of constant Leu27IGF-II infusion into C57BL/6 mice from mid-late
gestation.
Methods: 1mg/kg/day Leu27IGFII (n¼10 pregnancies, 80 fetuses) or vehicle
(n¼12, 83 fetuses) was delivered via a subcutaneous mini-osmotic pump
from E12.5-E18.5, at which time fetal and placental weights were recorded. Frequency distribution curves of fetal weight were produced and
values calculated for 5th and 95th centiles. Fetuses below/above these
weights were deemed SGA or LGA, respectively, as per the human
criterion.
Results: Leu27IGFII treatment reduced fetal weight distribution, by
reducing the number of fetuses below the 5th centile (6 vs. 2) and similarly
reducing those above the 95th centile (5 vs. 0) (see ﬁgure). Placental
weights were signiﬁcantly decreased in the treated group (83.2 2.4mg
treated vs. 90.1 2.6mg vehicle, p<0.05), and an exaggerated
fetal:placental weight ratio (p<0.05) suggested enhanced placental
efﬁciency.

A65

Phelipe Oliveira Favaron1, Andrea Maria Mess1, Moacir Franco Oliveira2,
Maria Angelica Miglino1, Pascale Chavatte-Palmer3, Anne Tarrade3
1
Department of Surgery, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Sao
Paulo, Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Animal Science,
Universidade Federal Rural do Semi-Árido, Mossoró, Ceará, Brazil, 3INRA,
UMR 1198BDR, Jouy-en-Josas, ENVA, Maisons Alfort, Fondation PremUp,
Paris, France
The mature chorioallantoic placenta in rodents is organized in labyrinth
zone (Lz), junctional zone (Jz), and decidua (Dd). Within rodents, the
placental development of murids has been well described but that of
cricetids remains less investigated.
Objectives: We described the development of the main placental regions
in a wild Brazilian rodent Necromys lasiurus.
Methods: The volume fraction (VF) of different cell types which constitute
the labyrinth was quantiﬁed by the one stop stereology using 31 placentae
at different stages of gestation. In addition, we investigated the volume
changes of the Lz, Jz, and Dd in samples of early gestation (10-11 days,
n¼3), mid-gestation (15-16 days, n¼4), and near term (21 days, n¼3) using
the Cavalieri principle. 5 mm sections were stained using H&E and fetal
vessels were localized by immunohistochemistry using vimentin. Samples
were analyzed using the MercatorÒ software and statistical analysis
(one-way ANOVA and Mann and Whitney test) was performed using
Graphpad PrismÒ.
Results: There was a signiﬁcant increase in absolute placental volume
from early (4.4270.282mm3) to mid-gestation (12.981.305mm3,
p<0.01), followed by a reduction near term (7.520.155mm3, p<0.05). The
absolute volume of the Lz, Jz, and Dd followed this same trend. The VF of
the labyrinth components (fetal vessels, maternal compartment, giant cells
and trophoblast) differed according to gestational age with a continuous
increase in the proportion of fetal vessels from day 10 (7.380.49%) to
21 (34.050.876%, p<0.01) and in that of giant cells from mid(11.660.286%) to late gestation (19.261.344%, p<0.01). In contrast, the
VF of trophoblast decreased from mid- (37.291.013%) to late gestation
(21.160.658%, p<0.01). There was no signiﬁcant variation in the VF of
maternal compartment throughout pregnancy.
Conclusion: Although the placental volume in N. lasiurus is smaller than
murine placenta, the dynamics of placental development appears similar
between these rodents.

ĂConclusion: These results indicate that although smaller, the placentas of
Leu27IGFII-treated C57 mice have greater capacity for supporting normal
fetal growth. The reduction in SGA and LGA fetuses post-treatment
supports the potential use of this analogue as a means of standardising
fetal growth.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A66

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.100

P1.101

EARLY YOLK SAC DEVELOPMENT IN GALEA SPIXII
(RODENTIA, CAVIIDAE)

DEVELOPING THE BRAIN: A POTENTIAL ROLE FOR THE
PLACENTA IN HOMININ BRAIN EVOLUTION?

Moacir Franco Oliveira1, André Menezes do Vale1, Phelipe Oliveira
Favaron2, Gleidson Benevides de Oliveira1, Maria Angelica Miglino2,
Andrea Maria Mess2
1
Department of Animal Science, Universidade Federal Rural do Semi-Árido,
Mossoró, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil, 2Department of Surgery, School of
Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, University of Sao Paulo, Sao
Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

Julienne Rutherford1,2, Elizabeth Abrams2, Kate Clancy3, Victoria DeMartelly1, Sana Said2
1
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA, 2UIC, Department of
Anthropology, USA, 3University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

Placentation in caviomorphs is characterized by key characters such as
a yolk sac that is inverted and temporarily associated to the uterus and
placenta. However, ground laying processes are not well understood.
Objectives: Herein, we investigated the yolk sac inversion in a small cavy
native to Brazil, the preá Galea spixii (Wagler, 1831).
Methods: Data were obtained from 30 females of gestational days 6, 10-15,
20, 25, and 30. Samples were investigated by means of histology
(haematoxilin and eosin, Toluidine blue and periodic acid Schiff), immunohistochemistry for vimentin (1:200) and PCNA (1:800), and scanning
and transmission electron microscopy.
Results: Implantation had been done on day 6, resulting in an inner
embryoblast and the outer trophectoderm. From day 10 onward, an
ectoplacental cone as precursor of the placenta and the ﬁrst development
of hypoblast cell groups as precursors of the yolk sac tissues were present.
Following implantation, a rapid differentiation of the yolk sac tissues took
place in the blastocysts. At day 13, both the visceral and parts of the
parietal yolk sac layers occurred, surrounding a yolk sac cavity. On day 14,
an exposition of the visceral yolk sac endoderm to the outside was present,
which characterizes yolk sac inversion, associated with degeneration of
the parietal endoderm. The visceral yolk sac near the chorioallantoic
placenta became highly villous, proliferative, vascularized and attached to
the uterus and placenta.
Conclusion: Galea showed the caviomorph conditions in blastocyst
development as well as in the nature and position of the deﬁnitive yolk sac.
However, data suggest that the early yolk sac development in caviomorphs
is more diverse than thought before.

Objectives: Of all primates, humans produce the largest-bodied and
–brained neonates, relative to maternal size. This suggests that the intrauterine supply of nutrients available to the developing fetus by the
placenta has increased or been made more efﬁciently available in hominins compared to other primates. The monkeys, apes, and humans all have
hemochorial placentas: within that framework, do they differ from one
another in ways that could explain differences in fetal brain growth?
Methods: 1) We compared descriptions and consequences of placental
invasion and vascular remodeling across primate taxa. 2) To calculate
placental efﬁciencies at term we performed literature searches to extract
data regarding placental, neonatal body, and brain weights in as many
primate taxa as we could ﬁnd. 3) We compared the magnitude in increases
in efﬁciency across late gestation between humans and vervet monkeys. 4)
We compared increases in villous surface area relative to fetal growth
across late gestation between humand and vervet monkeys.
Results: Several lines of evidence suggest that human and ape placentation is more invasive than monkey placentation. Apes and humans, the
largest-brained primates, have the most efﬁcient placentas, both in terms
of supporting overall fetal growth and brain growth speciﬁcally. While
placental efﬁciency increases across gestation for both the vervet and the
human, the magnitude is signiﬁcantly greater in humans (65% vs. 48%). It
takes 8 times as much surface area to build one gram of human fetus as it
does vervet fetus (4.0 mm2 vs. 0.5 mm2, p<0.0001).
Discussion: Metabolic investment in the human fetal brain is high. These
preliminary ﬁndings suggest that the more expensive the fetal brain, the
more the hemochorial placenta exploits existing mechanisms (i.e. invasiveness, efﬁciency, surface area) to enhance energetic investment.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.102

P1.103

REDUCED TAUT IN PRETERM SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST MAY
ACCOUNT FOR REDUCED PLACENTAL TAURINE AND POTENTIAL
INCREASED NEURODEVELOPMENTAL RISK IN PRETERM
INFANTS

ROLES OF HTRA1 AND HTRA3 IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF
PLACENTA

Pascal Getreuer1, Michelle DesForges3, Mark Alexander2,1, Carolyn
Salaﬁa1,2, Eunkyue Park2, Georgia Schuller-Levis2, Samantha VanHorn1
1
Placental Analytics LLC, Larchmont, NY, USA, 2Institute for Basic Research,
Staten Island, NY, USA, 3University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Background: The amino acid taurine promotes neuronal growth and
development before and after birth. The placenta actively transports
taurine from maternal blood to the fetus via a taurine speciﬁc transporter
protein (TauT). Oxidative stress and acute infections, the two most
common causes of preterm birth, affect placental structure and/or function, and thus may result in reduced trans-placental taurine transfer and
lower fetal taurine levels, increasing risk for poor neurodevelopmental
outcome. Here we test the hypothesis that placentas delivered preterm,
previously shown to have reduced taurine concentrations, have lower
syncytiotrophoblast TauT protein compared to term controls.
Methods: Details of placental samples analysed included 12 term controls
and 17 preterm (PT, 10 preeclamptic, 11 infected and 4 with both pathologies). TauT protein was detected by immunohistochemistry; slides were
digitized. Three representative regions of interest (ROI) were extracted
from the slides by a blinded reviewer. Segmentation was performed using
linear discriminant analysis and normalized to villous area.
Results: The correlation between TauT and taurine level overall was 0.303.
However, two distinct clusters are present in the scatter plot. Within each
cluster, the correlations are 0.732 and 0.818 (p-values < 0.002) with linear
regressions:
TauT ¼ 0.089758$(taurine level) þ 0.217548,
TauT ¼ 0.109059$(taurine level) - 0.165649.
In this pilot sample, differences in TauT normalized to villous area are seen
as follows:
PT 0.35þ0.19 Infected PT 0.31þ0.17 Preeclamptic PT 0.34þ0.20
Term 0.38þ0.17 Non-infected PT 0.39þ0.18 Non preeclamptic PT 0.37þ
0.16
Conclusion: Lower taurine concentrations in placentas delivered preterm
is associated with reduced syncytial TauT expression. Compromised transplacental taurine transfer capacity could limit taurine availability for
neuronal development, increasing risk for poor childhood neurological
function. In uncomplicated pregnancies, placental TauT expression and
taurine concentrations are comparable between early and late gestation.
Factors responsible for altered placental taurine transfer in preterm birth
require further investigation.

A67

Zobaer Hasan, Chio Oka, Masashi Kawaichi
Nara Institute of Science & Technology, Ikoma, Japan
Objectives: The HtrA (High Temperature Requirement Factor) family of
secretory serine proteases has been found in different species ranging from
bacteria to human. Mammals have four HtrA members, HtrA1-4. HtrA1
and HtrA3 are expressed most abundantly in placenta and have been
implicated in placenta development. Both HtrA1 and HtrA3 were upregulated during implantation and ﬁrst-trimester pregnancy at placentation
in the decidua. Some previous researches showed that HtrA1 expressed in
the ectoplacental cone around embryonic day 6.5-8.5, whereas HtrA3
expressed from day 8.5 to 12.5 in the deciduas in mouse. Deregulation
of both HtrA1 and HtrA3 expression has been reported in human
preeclampsia with Intra uterine growth restriction. But the molecular
mechanism is yet to be discovered.
Methods: We developed HtrA1 -/-, HtrA3 -/- and HtrA1/3 double -/- mice.
We isolated placentas from these KO mice on different gestational period
and examined histology by various staining methods.
Results: Pups of HtrA1 -/-, HtrA3 -/- and HtrA1/3 -/- mice had lower body
weight than pups from wild type mothers. Pups of HtrA1/3 -/- were
smallest. The differences in body weight persisted for 1-2 months after
birth. The HtrA1 -/-, HtrA3 -/- and HtrA1/3 -/- mice had shorter labyrinth
and spongiotrophoblast layer compare with wild type mice. Vasculogenesis was decreased in these KO placentas and HtrA1/3 -/- placenta
showed the most severe abnormality. We observed presence of large
trophoblast islands in the labyrinth at embryonic day 14.5 placentas in all
knockout mice, but not in wild type mice. Interestingly, we found some
empty vacuole-like structure in the spongiotrophoblast layer of HtrA1 -/-,
HtrA3 -/- and HtrA1/3 -/- mouse placentas at E 14.5, whereas those spaces
were ﬁlled with spongiotrophoblast cells in wild type mice.
Conclusion: HtrA1 and HtrA3 are necessary for the normal development
of placenta and embryo in mice, especially in vasculogenesis in the
labyrinth and formation of mature junctional zone.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A68

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.104

P1.105

TCFAP2C DEPENDENT TROPHOBLAST LINEAGE
DIFFERENTIATION DURING PLACENTAL DEVELOPMENT

MACROPHAGE MIGRATION INHIBITORY FACTOR (MIF)
PRODUCED BY TROPHOBLAST CELLS AT MATERNAL-FETAL
INTERFACE AS A POSSIBLE SURVIVAL FACTOR FOR DECIDUAL
CELLS

Stephanie Kaiser1, Yvonne Koch1, Alexandra Gellhaus1, Hubert Schorle2,
Elke Winterhager1
1
Institute of Molecular Biology, University Hospital, Essen, Germany, 2Dept.
of Developmental Pathology, Medical School Bonn, Bonn, Germany
Objectives: The placenta is the ﬁrst organ to be formed during pregnancy
and impairment of placental formation leads to various pregnancy
complications. It has been shown that the highly conserved family of
Activator Protein-2 (AP-2/Tfap2) is important for placenta development.
We could demonstrate a marked downregulation of Tfap2c expression
level in lineage development of trophoblast stem cells lacking connexin 31
(Cx31). This could cause the placental phenotype observed in Cx31 deﬁcient mice. Since complete Tfap2c deﬁciency causes early embryonic death
on day 7.5 of gestation due to a loss of extraembryonic cell lineage
development we investigated mice heterozygous for Tfap2c.
Methods: To investigate the phenotype and genotype of the Tfap2c
heterozygous placentas we performed immunohistochemistry of
formalin-ﬁxed and parafﬁn-embedded samples and investigated various
expression levels with quantitative real time PCR.
Results: We found that the failure of an appropriate lineage development
in Cx31 deﬁcient trophoblast stem cells is probably due to a reduced
expression level of Tfap2c. To investigate the underlying mechanisms we
have started to characterize the placentas of Tfap2c heterozygous mice
which express reduced levels of Tfap2c and revealed enhanced resorption
sites at ED 14.5 (52% compared to 5.7% in wild type matings). Phenotypic
analysis of ED 14.5 placentas showed a reduced spongiotrophoblast layer
which was identiﬁed by using the marker gene tpbpa. Moreover development of the labyrinth was impaired indicated by higher proliferation
rates and large clusters of undifferentiated cells, both signs of delayed
differentiation. The clusters showed staining for tpbpa, PAS and Ki67 which
indicates an accumulation of glycogen rich and proliferative cell populations. In addition, staining for CD31 revealed less and poorly branched
embryonic vessels in the labyrinth.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings point to an impaired trophoblast lineage
differentiation in heterozygous Tfap2c mice leading to reduced spongiotrophoblast formation combined with a delay in labyrinthine development
which could be the reason for embryonic lethality.

Adriana Fraga Costa1,3, Luana Paulesu2, Miriam R. Faria1, Sergio Ferreira de
Oliveira1, Decio S. Pinto Junior3, Estela Bevilacqua1
1
Institute of Biomedical Sciences -University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil, 2University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 3School of Dentistry - University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil
Previous studies in our laboratory showed the expression pattern of
macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) by trophoblast cells and,
their receptors (CD44/CD74) by decidual cells during post implantation
stages in mice. These results support the idea of decidual cells as potential
targets of this cytokine. MIF plays relevant roles as pro-inﬂammatory
factor and mediator of the immune system. Recently also, functions in
cell survival and proliferation has also been demonstrated. In this context,
we analyzed the possible role of MIF in mouse decidual cells in vitro.
Decidual primary cell cultures were treated with mouse recombinant (mr)
MIF with or without PI3K/AKT inhibitors (Wortmannin and LY294002).
Cultures were examined by immunohistochemical reactions and Western
blot after hydrogen peroxide treatment used as cell death inducer. MIF
receptor complex CD74/CD44 was immunolocalized in the cultured
decidual cells MIF. The addition of mrMIF reduced signiﬁcantly the
apoptosis levels and was positively correlated to the increase of pAkt
expression. After hydrogen peroxide treatment, the apoptotic and necrotic
levels increased signiﬁcantly; apoptosis, however, was completely abolished when MIF was added to the assay. The levels of necrosis did not
change after MIF treatment. Our results therefore indicate that MIF can
reduce the spontaneous and induced apoptotic indexes in decidual cells,
activating an AKT route, a presumptive pathway associated to cell survival
in different cell types. Notably, this ﬁnding suggests a role for MIF in
decidual homeostasis; insofar it ensures the integrity of the maternal-fetal
interface.
Financial Support: FAPESP and CNPq

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.106

P1.107

THE POSSIBLE ROLE OF PIM KINASES (PIM1, PIM2 AND PIM3)
UPON LIF STIMULATION IN TRANSFORMED TROPHOBLAST
CELLS AND CHORIOCARCINOMA CELLS

ERK1/2 CROSSTALKS WITH STATS IN TROPHOBLASTIC CELLS

Stella Mary, Wittaya Chaiwangyen, Sebastian Hoelters, Justine S Fitzgerald,
Udo R Markert
Placenta Laboratories, Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena,
Jena, Germany
Objective: Proviral Integrations of Moloney (PIM) kinases belong to the
family of serine/threonine kinases and in human are encoded by Pim1,
Pim2, Pim3 genes which are associated with tumorigenesis especially in
solid tumours and hematologic malignancies. The expression of PIM is
mediated by the Signal Transducer and Activators of Transcription/Janus
kinase STAT/JAK signalling pathway. PIM regulate cell progression and
survival. PIM kinases are constitutively active and their activity supports
in vitro tumour cell growth and survival. So far, PIM kinases have not been
reported in trophoblast cells. Therefore, we aimed to identify PIM
expression in trophoblast.
Methods: The techniques performed in this study were cell culture
(HTR8/sv-neo and Jeg-3), LIF stimulation, Western blotting, and real time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). HTR8/sv-neo and Jeg-3 were seeded into
6-well plates and stimulated with LIF for different time intervals. The
treated cells were harvested, lysed and PIM1/2/3 and STAT3 expression
was assessed by Western blot. Finally, total RNA was extracted and
quantiﬁed followed by real time PCR for quantiﬁcation of Pim1/2/3 gene
expression.
Results: HTR8/Sv-neo and Jeg-3 cell lines express PIM kinases. Upon LIF
stimulation and Phosphorylation of STAT3, Western blots and real time
PCR displayed a relatively low expression of Pim1 compared with Pim2
and Pim3.
Conclusion: PIM kinases are present in trophoblastic cells and may be
involved in the regulation of their functions. It may be concluded that PIM
dysregulation is involved in placenta disorders and subsequent
pathologies.

A69

Stephanie Ospina Prieto, Diana Maria Morales Prieto, Wittaya
Chaiwangyen, Francisco Lazaro Pereira De Sousa, Udo R Markert
Placenta Lab, Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Jena,
Germany
Objectives: Pregnancy tolerance is regulated by mediators expressed by
maternal and fetal cells, like Leukemia Inhibitory Factor (LIF), Epidermal
Growth Factor (EGF) and Oncostatine M (OSM). Signal Transducer and
Activators of Transcription (STAT)-1, -3 and -5 play important roles in
trophoblast proliferation and regulation of functions. They are activated by
a plethora of cytokines and can form homo- and heterodimers. ERK1/2 is
a molecule of the MAPK cascade recognized as a mediator of trophoblast
proliferation. The aim of this study was to analyze the effects of LIF, EGF
and OSM on ERK1/2, STAT-1, -3 and -5 activation and the possible crosstalk
between ERK1/2 and the STATs in trophoblastic cell lines.
Methods: The trophoblastic cell lines JEG-3 and HTR-8/SVneo were
stimulated with EGF, LIF and OSM. Subsequently, ERK1/2, STAT-1 and -5
activation was inhibited by U0126, Fludarabine and siRNA, respectively.
Phosphorylation of STAT-1, -3, -5 and ERK1/2 was assessed by Western
blotting. Finally, STATs DNA-binding capacity and cell proliferation were
analyzed in presence/absence of cytokines and inhibitors.
Results: LIF and OSM induce STAT1- and -3 phosphorylation and
DNA-binding in HTR-8 and JEG-3 cells. EGF is a major inducer of STAT5
phosphorylation in both cell lines. ERK1/2 phosphorylation was induced
with LIF, OSM and EGF. Suppression of STAT-1 and -5 elevated ERK1/2
activity, whilst abrogation of p-ERK1/2 results in an increase of STAT-3
activation and DNA-binding capability. Proliferation increases in all cell
lines after treatment with LIF, EGF and OSM, while STAT-5 silencing
resulted in a decrease. Invasion was decreased by STAT-1, -3 inhibition
while STAT-5 silencing did not result in signiﬁcant changes.
Conclusion: LIF and OSM signal through STAT1 and -3, while EGF uses
STAT5. All applied cytokines activate ERK1/2, and induce STAT-mediated
proliferation and invasion in trophoblastic cells. Crosstalks between
JAK/STAT and ERK1/2 MAPK pathways are evident.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A70

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.108

P1.109

THE CCN3 PROTEIN REGULATES PROLIFERATION AND
MIGRATION PROPERTIES IN JEG3 TROPHOBLAST CELLS VIA
ERK1/2, AKT AND NOTCH SIGNALLING

ELASTIN-DERIVED PEPTIDE MEDIATED SIGNALLING IN
EXTRAVILLOUS TROPHOBLAST

Alexandra Gellhaus1, Jessica Wagener1, Wei Yang1,2, Nadine Wolf1, Caroline
E. Dunk1,3, Elke Winterhager1, Stephanie Kaiser1
1
Molecular Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, NRW, Germany,
2
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China,
3
Dept. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute,
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada
Objectives: Previous studies showed that the matricellular CCN3 is
upregulated in Jeg3 trophoblast cells as well as in the invasive trophoblast
of placental explants by low oxygen and is found to be deregulated in
early-onset preeclampsia. We identiﬁed the glycosylated CCN3 (g-CCN3)
as well as the non-glycosylated CCN3 (ng-CCN3) protein as a key factor in
regulating trophoblast proliferation and invasion. Jeg3 cells revealed
decreased proliferation upon both forms of CCN3 but enhanced migration
and invasion properties combined with an elevation of MMP-2 and MMP-9
activity was only found for ng-CCN3.
Methods and Results: Here we focused on signalling cascades MAPK, PI3
kinase/Akt and Notch/p21 for mediating the dual function of CCN3 for
trophoblast proliferation versus migration/invasion in Jeg3 cells upon
stimulation with glycosylated and non-glycosylated recombinant CCN3
(g-/ng-rCCN3). Analysis of the CCN3-mediated signalling pathways
showed that ng-rCCN3 stimulated migration properties by activating two
different signalling pathways, the PI3 kinase/Akt and the MAPK cascade
and these two signalling cascades worked independent from each other.
Moreover, ng-rCCN3-stimulated trophoblast cell migration - but not the
antiproliferative capacity of both forms of CCN3 - was mediated via
Integrin a5b1 signalling using siRNA transfection. The Notch signalling
pathway contributes to the antiproliferative properties of both forms of
CCN3 evidenced by an increased expression of Notch1 and its target gene,
the cell cycle inhibitor p21.
Conclusion: Our data showed that the presence of both forms of CCN3
in trophoblast cells is associated with a balance in proliferation and
migration/invasion properties which are triggered by different signalling
pathways. A deregulation of the CCN3 forms in preeclampsia could lead to
an imbalance in proliferation versus invasion which might contribute to
the shallow invasion observed in this disease.

Michelle Desforges, Sarah Kelt, Lynda Harris, John Aplin
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Objectives: Elastin breakdown in the walls of the spiral arteries during
early pregnancy facilitates their transformation into dilated, high-ﬂow,
low-resistance channels. Elastolysis is known to generate biologically
active elastin-derived peptides (EDP). We have previously demonstrated
that EDP promote extravillous trophoblast (EVT) invasion, migration and
upregulation of elastolytic enzymes. We hypothesise that EDP release
during elastolysis orchestrates a positive feedback loop that promotes EVT
invasion and further elastin breakdown, completing the process of
vascular remodelling. Here we investigate expression of potential receptors and intracellular signalling events mediating EDP effects in EVT.
Methods: First trimester placenta and decidua basalis were processed for
immunohistochemistry, to examine expression of galactin 3 and the
elastin receptor complex, receptors known to bind EDP in other cell types.
Primary EVT isolated from ﬁrst trimester placenta (7-12 weeks gestation)
were exposed to 1mg/ml EDP or vehicle control (0.1% DMSO) for 30 minutes
before lysing for parallel determination of the relative levels of protein
phosphorylation using a Human Phospho-Kinase Array Kit (R&D Systems).
Lysates from three separate cell preparations were pooled for analysis.
Results: Expression of the elastin receptor complex was observed in
villous cytotrophoblasts (CTB), syncytiotrophoblast, and EVT in placental
cell columns. Galectin 3 was expressed in villous CTB, and to a much lesser
extent in cell columns. Interstitial and endovascular EVT did not express
galectin 3; however, a proportion of endovascular EVT expressed the
elastin receptor complex. Following exposure of primary EVT to EDP,
phosphorylation of p38 alpha and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS)
was increased by 85% and 130%, respectively.
Conclusion: The EDP receptors galactin 3 and the elastin receptor complex
are expressed in human ﬁrst trimester placenta. The biological effects of
EDP on EVT are mediated via phosphorylation of p38 and eNOS, intracellular signalling molecules that are also associated with tumour cell
migration and invasion.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.110

P1.111

AN IGF/MIR483-3P REGULATORY FEEDBACK LOOP INFLUENCES
HUMAN PLACENTAL DEVELOPMENT

THE MIRNA SIGNATURE OF TROPHOBLAST CELLS

Farkhondeh Farrokhnia, Susan Hibbert, Karen Forbes
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Objectives: Fetal growth complications such as FGR and macrosomia, are
associated with altered placental development and function. IGF-I and -II
are required for optimal cytotrophoblast (CT) proliferation thus they are
important mediators of both placental and fetal growth. We have recently
demonstrated that microRNAs (miRs) are also important mediators of CT
proliferation. In this study, we explored the possibility that IGFs and miRs
interact to regulate placental growth.
Methods: First trimester placental explants were cultured in serum-free
conditions for 24 h and then exposed to IGF-I (10nM) or IGF-II (10nM)
for a further 24 h (n¼6). miR expression was proﬁled using arrays and data
were validated by QPCR. In-situ hybridisation was used to localise miRs
within placenta. miR-speciﬁc inhibitors (30-100nM) were introduced into
placental explants by nucleofection. Following conﬁrmation of miR inhibition (QPCR), levels of proliferation (Ki67 and BrdU) were assessed by
immunohistochemistry and miR target expression was analysed by arrays,
western blotting and QPCR. Direct interaction of miRs with target genes
was assessed by RNA-inducing silencing complex immunoprecipitation
(RIP) followed by gene speciﬁc PCR (RIP-chip).
Results: IGF (-I and –II) signiﬁcantly decreased expression of two miRs
(P<0.001); one of these, miR-483-3p was expressed throughout the villous
stroma and within cytotrophoblast in ﬁrst trimester placenta. Analysis of
CT proliferation revealed that inhibition of miR-483-3p expression (using
a miR-speciﬁc inhibitor) signiﬁcantly enhanced levels of CT proliferation
(P< 0.01; n¼6). One predicted target of miR-483-3p is IGF-I; protein arrays,
western blotting and QPCR conﬁrmed that miR-483-3p negatively regulates IGF-I expression. RIP-Chip demonstrated that the miR483-3p/IGF-I
interaction is direct.
Conclusion: Here we demonstrate that maternal IGF-I acts via miR-483-3p
to potentiate placental IGF-I expression. This positive regulatory feedback
loop appears to inﬂuence CT proliferation. Interestingly, we have preliminary data demonstrating that this feedback loop is dysregulated in
pregnancies complicated by macrosomia.

A71

Diana Maria Morales Prieto1, Stephanie Ospina Prieto1, Wittaya Chaiwangyen1, Maja Weber1, Anja Weise2, Bernd Gruhn3, Justine S Fitzgerald1,
Udo R Markert1
1
Placenta Lab, Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Jena,
Germany, 2Institute for Human Genetics, University Hospital Jena,
Germany, Jena, Germany, 3Children’s Hospital, University Hospital Jena,
Germany, Jena, Germany
Objectives: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small single-stranded RNA molecules
which are important post-transcriptional modulators of gene expression.
Trophoblast cells are a group of fetal cells in the placenta displaying
important functions in the establishment and maintenance of pregnancy
in humans. We aimed to compare the miRNA proﬁle (MiRNome) of
primary ﬁrst and third trimester trophoblast cells with that of different
trophoblastic cell lines. We also analyzed miRNA expression in four
trophoblastic cell lines (JEG-3, ACH-3P, AC1-M59, HTR8/SV neo) before and
after Leukemia Inhibitory Facor (LIF) challenge.
Methods: Total RNA was isolated from cytotrophoblast cells from healthy
ﬁrst and term placentae and the cell lines HTR-8/SVneo (immortalized
trophoblast cells), JEG-3 (choriocarcinoma), ACH-3P and AC1-M59, which
are choriocarcinoma cells fused with ﬁrst and third trimester trophoblast
cells, respectively. Furthermore, total RNA was isolated from cells
stimulated with LIF for 4h. The expression level of 762 different miRNAs
was quantitatively analyzed by using a TaqMan Human MicroRNA Array.
Results for 10 important miRNAs were conﬁrmed by individual qPCR and
expression kinetics were analyzed after LIF stimulation. As being one of the
most affected, miR-141 has been silenced by RNA interference or overexpressed to test its role in proliferation of JEG-3 cells after 24h and 48h.
Finally, HTR-8 and JEG-3 cells were karyotyped through MultiplexFluorescence In Situ Hybridisation (M-FISH).
Results: MicroRNA expression proﬁles of ﬁrst and third isolated trophoblasts were more similar to those in JEG-3, ACH-3P and AC1-M59 exhibiting high expression of the chromosome 19 miRNA cluster (C19MC),
known to be almost exclusively expressed in the placenta, as well as the
three miRNAs of the cluster miR-371, recognized as speciﬁc markers for
human embryonic stem cells. Conversely, HTR-8 exhibits almost no
expression of the C19MC miRNAs but instead high expression of C14MC.
These results correlate with those observed in the M-FISH karyotype of
HTR-8 cells, where both chromosomes C19 and C14 were found to be
physically altered. MicroRNAs change differentially between cell lines
under LIF stimulation. Only a small group of miRNAs was simultaneously
altered in all tested cells. Silencing of miR-141 completely inhibited
proliferation of JEG-3 cells, while overexpression had no effect.
Conclusion: LIF modulates microRNA expression in trophoblastic cells in
a cell type-dependent manner. The miRNA expression proﬁle provides
a tool for the identiﬁcation of trophoblast cells and their malignant
derivates. Several miRNA highly expressed in trophoblastic cells have been
previously detected in pregnancy serum. MiR-141 may have an essential
role in regulation of functions in trophoblastic cells.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A72

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.112

P1.113

TARGET GENE-SPECIFIC RNAI FOR PLACENTA RESEARCH

EXPRESSION AND FUNCTION OF THE IRON-REGULATORY
PROTEIN HEMOJUVELIN IN THE UTERO-PLACENTAL UNIT

Kumiko Ui-Tei
The University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: RNA interference (RNAi) is the process through which small
interfering RNA (siRNA) induces sequence-speciﬁc posttranscriptional
gene silencing. RNAi is widely recognized as a powerful tool not only for
functional genomics but also for therapeutic applications, since the
silencing effect of siRNA has been assumed to be extremely speciﬁc.
However, accumulated evidences revealed that siRNA could also downregulate many unintended genes. This phenomenon is referred to as
off-target effect. For understanding accurate target gene function and
successful therapeutic application, it may be critical to select functional
siRNAs with minimized off-target effects. Here I show our elaborative
siRNA selection algorithm based on our mechanistic analysis of RNAi
machinery.
Methods: We determined the relationship between siRNA seed sequences
and off-target effects by introducing each of seed-matched target
sequences into a luciferase reporter plasmid, and examined the change in
luciferase activity in transfected human HeLa cells as a function of siRNA
concentration. The result was also conﬁrmed by genome-wide experiments using microarray.
Results: The seed-dependent off-target effects were apparently different
according to siRNA seed sequences. The capability to induce off-target
effect of each siRNA was revealed to be strongly correlated to the thermodynamic stability in the duplex formed between siRNA seed and its
target mRNA. The seed-dependent off-target effect is almost completely
eliminated with G:U pairing in the seed-target duplex. In this case, offtarget effect is avoided probably because of the structural perturbation
but not stability in seed-target duplex.
Conclusion: We revealed that the seed-dependent off-target effect is
induced by strong stability in siRNA seed-target duplex. This means siRNA
with low stability in seed-target duplex has little or no seed-dependent
off-target gene silencing activity. Thus, our strategy to select targetspeciﬁc siRNA may be applicable for functional genomics and safety
therapeutic applications in placenta research.

Vadivel Ganapathy, Jaya Gnana-Prakasam, Srinivas Sonne
Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, GA, USA
Objectives: Several proteins maintain iron homeostasis in body; mutations in HFE, hepcidin, ferroportin, transferrin receptor-2, and hemojuvelin
(HJV or HFE2), disrupt iron homeostasis causing the iron-overload disease
hemochromatosis. There have been some studies on the expression of
iron-regulatory proteins in placenta, but none in uterus. HFE, ferroportin,
and hepcidin are expressed in placenta. Here we examined the expression
of HJV in placenta and uterus, and determined the effects of HJV deletion
on the utero-placental unit in mice.
Methods: RNA from human placenta, primary human placental trophoblast cells, and the human placental cell lines BeWo and Jar was used for
RT-PCR to examine HJV expression. Cell lines and primary cells were used
to determine HJV expression in uterine myometrium and blood vessels.
RNA samples from wild type and HJV-knockout mouse placenta and uterus
were used for RT-PCR and tissue sections for immunoﬂuorescence to
examine HJV expression in utero-placental unit. The functional consequences of deletion of HJV were assessed in HJV-knockout mice.
Results: HJV mRNA and protein are expressed in human and mouse
placenta and uterus. The expression is evident in BeWo cells but not in Jar
or primary trophoblast cells, suggesting that HJV expression is likely
restricted to syncytiotrophoblast. In uterus, HJV is expressed only in
endometrium but not in muscle cells. HJV-knockout mice are fertile;
however, at older age (16-22 months), knockout mice have drastic
morphological changes in uterus, characterized by angiomatous polyps.
Interestingly, cultured endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells
do not express HJV.
Conclusions: The iron-regulatory protein HJV is expressed in placenta and
uterus; its expression is restricted to syncytiotrophoblast. Deletion of the
protein in mice causes abnormal endothelial cell proliferation, leading to
angiomas. Since blood vessels do not seem to express HJV, angiomas
seen in HJV-knockout mice occur most likely through modulation of
pro-angiogenic factors.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A73

P1.114

P1.115

BEWO-CELL-DERIVED MIR-517A MODULATES THE
EXPRESSION OF PRKG1 IN JURKAT CELLS VIA EXOSOMES

PLACENTAL EXTRACELLULAR VESICLES’ MICRO-RNA PROFILE,
IS ALTERED BY FREE HEMOGLOBIN AND RESTORED BY
ALPHA-1-MICROGLOBULIN

Md. Moksed Ali1, Takami Takizawa1, Kunio Kikuchi1, Shigeru Saito2, Toshihiro Takizawa1
1
Dept Molecular Medicine & Anatomy, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo,
Japan, 2Dept Obstetrics & Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Toyama, Toyama, Japan
Objectives: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that repress
gene expression by binding to the complementary sequences of 30 -UTRs of
their target mRNAs. We have recently developed an in vitro model system
for analysis of placenta trophoblast cell and T cell communication via
exosomes (manuscript in preparation). In this study, we identiﬁed a target
mRNA of placenta-speciﬁc miRNA miR-517a and investigated whether
miR-517a was capable of modulating its target gene expression in recipient
cells via exosomes using the in vitro model system.
Methods: Microarray analysis on Jurkat cells (human T cell lymphoblastlike cell line) overexpressing miR-517a was performed with Agilent DNA
microarrays. MiR-517a target genes were validated by 30 -UTR-luciferase
reporter assay. pMIR-REPORT-luc reporter plasmid was used for luciferase
assay (Ambion). Exosomes isolated from the culture supernatant of BeWo
cells (human trophoblast cell line) were incubated with Jurkat cells. After
incubation with the BeWo-exosomes, the expression levels of the targets
were examined by real-time PCR.
Results: Microarray analysis showed that 7 genes were downregulated
after miR-517a overexpression in Jurkat cells. One of these genes was
PRKG1 encoding cyclic GMP dependent protein kinase 1 that is essential for
numerous physiological processes. We found that PRKG1 was a target
candidate of miR-517a in silico. miR-517a overexpression signiﬁcantly
decreased luciferase activity in Jurkat cells cotransfected with pMIRREPORT-PRKG1. Exosome analysis using the in vitro model system revealed
that the expression level of PRKG1 mRNA was signiﬁcantly downregulated
in Jurkat cells after treatment with the BeWo-exosomes.
Conclusion: We demonstrate that PRKG1 is indeed a target of miR-517a in
Jurkat cells. These in vitro ﬁndings suggest that placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs
can modulate their target mRNA expression in maternal recipient cells via
exosomes. We provide a new insight into cell-cell communication via
exosomes between placenta and lymphocytes.

Tina Cronqvist1, Karen Saljé1,2, Srinivas Veerla7, Mary Familari5, Seth Guller6, Henning Schneider3, Bo Åkerström4, Magnus Olsson4, Stefan
Hansson1
1
Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Clinical Sciences,
Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Ernst Moritz Arndt University of Greifswald, Greifswald,
Germany, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Inselspital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 4Division of Infection Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences, Biomedical Center, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden, 5Department of Zoology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia, Melbourne, Australia, 6Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Reproductive Immunology Unit,
School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA, Connecticut, USA, 7Department of Oncology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Objectives: We previously showed that free fetal hemoglobin (HbF) plays
a role in the pathophysiology of preeclampsia (PE). Free Hb causes functional and structural damage to the placenta, effects that can be counteracted by the endogenous heme scavenger alpha-1-microglobulin (A1M).
Extracellular vesicle (EV) release and placental micro-RNA (miRNA)
expression is altered in PE. We hypothesize that these changes are caused
by the toxic effects of free Hb. In this study we examined the miRNA proﬁle
in EVs released from placental tissue perfused ex-vivo with free Hb. The
therapeutic effect of A1M was also evaluated.
Methods: Human term placentas were perfused using the dual placental
perfusion system previously described. Perfusion media were supplemented with free Hb and/or A1M. Control experiments were performed
using medium only.
To isolate EVs, perfusion medium was centrifuged at 3,500g for 30min and
ultra-centrifuged at 110,000g for 3hrs. Total RNA was extracted from the
EVs using mirVana miRNA isolation kit. RNA quality was determined using
Bioanalyzer, followed by hybridization to Affymetrix GeneChipÒ miRNA
2.0 Array (Affymetrix Inc).
For the basic data analyses, background correction, normalization, and
probe summarization, miRNA QC tool (Affymetrix Inc) was used. SAM
(Signiﬁcance Analysis of Microarrays) method was used to identify
signiﬁcantly differentially expressed miRNAs.
Results: 149 miRNAs were expressed in over 70% of the samples. Four of
these (mir-373, mir-424*, mir-372 and mir-527) were identiﬁed as
signiﬁcantly up-regulated after Hb perfusions compared to controls
(q-value 0%), whereas no signiﬁcantly different miRNA expression was
seen in HbA1M and control samples.
Conclusion: Free Hb altered the miRNA expression of placental EVs. The
up-regulated miRNAs; mir-373, mir-372 and mir-527 are all expressed on
chromosome 19, close to the placental imprinted gene cluster C19MC. Mir424 is down-regulated in hypoxic trophoblasts. A1M reduced the Hb
induced changes, suggesting heme scavenging as a potential therapeutic
approach in PE.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A74

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.116

P1.117

CIRCULATING PLACENTA-SPECIFIC MIRNAS ARE DELIVERED TO
MATERNAL IMMUNE CELLS DURING PREGNANCY

ABERRANT EXPRESSION OF TRAIL IN PLACENTA AND
MATERNAL SERUM IN EARLY PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS

Saori Kambe1, Yoichi Ishida2, Kunio Kikuchi3, Hiroshi Yoshitake3, Akihide
Okuchi2, Shigeki Matsubara2, Mitsuaki Suzuki2, Shigeru Saito4, Toshiyuki
Takeshita1, Toshihiro Takizawa3
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo,
Japan, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Jichi Medical University,
Tochigi, Japan, 3Department of Molecular Medicine and Anatomy, Nippon
Medical School, Tokyo, Japan, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan

Kristiina Rull1,2, Kärt Tomberg1, Sulev Kõks3, Märt Möls4, Meeli Sirotkina5,
Signe Värv1, Maris Laan1
1
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
2
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia, 3Department of Physiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
4
Institute of Mathematical Statistics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
5
Department of Pathology, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia

Objectives: MicroRNAs (miRNAs), small non-coding RNAs of approximately 22 nucleotides in length, play a critical role in post-transcriptional
gene regulation. Human placenta expresses the unique miRNAs that are
derived from the miRNA cluster in human chromosome 19. These miRNAs
are secreted extracellularly via exosomes, which enter into maternal
circulation (Luo et al. Biol Reprod, 2009). However, little is known about
the role[s] of placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs during pregnancy. Some of miRNAs
are known to transfer into their target cells by exosomes, therefore we
hypothesized that the placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs in maternal circulation
may be delivered to immune cells in peripheral blood and work in immune
system during pregnancy. In this study, we tested the presence of
placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs in immune cells of pre- and post-delivery
maternal blood.
Methods: Pre- and post-delivery maternal blood samples were obtained
from the full-term women who gave informed consent according to
protocols approved by the Nippon Medical School Ethics Committee.
Mononuclear cells (MNCs), natural killer (NK) cells and regulatory T (Treg)
cells were isolated from the samples by using magnetic beads. Quantiﬁcation of miRNA expression was performed by real-Time PCR.
Results: Placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs were detectable in maternal MNCs
before delivery. In NK cells, abundant placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs were
detected before delivery; the levels of these miRNAs were signiﬁcantly
reduced 4 days after delivery. In contrast, Treg cells showed a little uptake
of placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs even before delivery; no differences were
found in the miRNA uptake between pre- and post-derivers.
Conclusion: We showed the presence of placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs in
maternal immune cells of peripheral blood during pregnancy and their
rapid clearance from the cells after delivery. These data lend support to the
assumption that circulating placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs are delivered to
maternal immune cells via exosomes and modulate their target mRNAs
that participate in immune tolerance during pregnancy.

Recurrent miscarriage (RM; 3 pregnancy losses) occurring in 1-3% of
fertile couples has a heterogeneous background with contribution from
both genetic and environmental factors. No biomarkers with high
predictive value of threatening miscarriage have been identiﬁed.
Objectives: We aimed to (i) perform whole-genome gene expression
proﬁling in the placental tissues from RM patients and elective termination of ﬁrst trimester pregnancy, (ii) determine the protein levels in
maternal sera during early pregnancy for the loci with differential
expression in placenta.
Methods: GeneChips (AffymetrixÒ) were used for discovery and Taqman
RT-qPCR assays for replication of mRNA expression in placentas from RM
cases (n¼13) compared to uncomplicated pregnancies matched for
gestational age (n¼23). Concentrations of soluble TRAIL (sTRAIL) and calprotectin (S100A8/A9) in maternal serum in normal ﬁrst trimester (n¼35)
and failed pregnancies: early miscarriage (n¼18), late miscarriage (n¼4),
tubal pregnancy (n¼11) were determined by ELISA.
Results: In RM placentas 30 differentially expressed transcripts were
identiﬁed. Signiﬁcantly increased placental mRNA expression of TNFrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand TRAIL (p¼1.4x10-3; fold change 1.68)
and S100A8 (p¼7.9x10-4; fold change 2.56) encoding inﬂammatory
marker calprotectin (S100A8/A9) was conﬁrmed by RT-qPCR. Compared to
normal pregnancy (sTRAIL 16.11.6pg/ml), signiﬁcantly higher maternal
serum sTRAIL was detected at the RM event (33.64.3pg/ml, p¼0.00027),
tubal pregnancy (30.53.9pg/ml, p¼0.035) and also in pregnant women,
who developed an unpredicted miscarriage after serum sampling
(28.54.4pg/ml, p¼0.039). Maternal serum levels of calprotectin were
neither diagnostic nor prognostic of early pregnancy failures (P>0.05).
Conclusion: The current study identiﬁed sTRAIL as a potential biomarker
in maternal serum for prediction of early pregnancy complications.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.118

P1.119

MIR-514: A NOVEL REGULATOR OF GROWTH FACTOR
SIGNALLING IN THE HUMAN PLACENTA

THE ROLES OF CAMP-DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE A (PKA)
AND EXCHANGE PROTEIN DIRECTLY ACTIVATED BY CAMP
(EPAC) FOR THE SYNCYTIALIZATION IN HUMAN PLACENTAL
BEWO CELLS

Sylvia Lui, Karen Forbes
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Objectives: Growth factors such as IGF-I and -II promote placental growth
by inducing activation of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)/ERK signalling
cascades. We have recently demonstrated that SHP-2 is a critical regulator
of RTK activation status in the placenta, so regulation of placental SHP-2
expression is important for normal pregnancy outcome. Endogenously,
gene expression is regulated by microRNAs (miRs); the human placenta
contains high levels of these molecules thus we investigated whether miRs
can modulate SHP-2 expression and placental growth.
Methods: To identify candidate miRs that regulate SHP-2 expression
bioinformatics was performed to identify miR transcriptome PCR arrays
(a library of miR mimetics; SABiosciences) enriched for miRs predicted to
target SHP-2 (identiﬁed from miRecords). SHP-2 speciﬁc primers were
applied to the arrays and miRs found to alter SHP-2 mRNA expression were
deﬁned as candidate SHP-2 regulators; the expression of these within the
ﬁrst trimester placenta was conﬁrmed by QPCR. miR speciﬁc mimetics
were transfected into ﬁrst trimester placental explants (n¼6) by nucleofection and explants cultured for up to 4 days (þ/-IGF-I; 10nM). QPCR and
western blotting were undertaken to assess the effect on mRNA and
protein expression and immunohistochemistry (Ki67) was performed to
assess proliferation.
Results: Transcriptome arrays revealed two novel candidate SHP-2 regulatory miRs: miR-754 overexpression increased SHP-2 mRNA expression
(2.16 fold) whilst miR-514 mimetics reduced SHP-2 mRNA expression (3.4
fold), suggesting that these were positive and negative regulators
respectively. Both miR-754 and miR-518 were expressed in the placenta.
Overexpression of miR-514 (6 fold; P<0.05; n¼5) in ﬁrst trimester
placental explants signiﬁcantly reduced SHP-2 mRNA and protein
expression and signiﬁcantly attenuated IGF-I-induced cytotrophoblast
proliferation (P<0.05; n¼6).
Conclusion: By modulating SHP-2 expression, miR-514 has been identiﬁed
as a novel growth factor regulatory molecule in the human placenta.
Ongoing studies will establish whether alterations in placental SHP-2 and/
or miR-514 expression are associated with fetal growth disorders.

A75

Satoshi Matsuyama1, Takahiro Nobuzane1,2, Yoshiki Kudo1,2
1
Department of Obsterics and Gynecology, Miyoshi Central Hospital,
Miyoshi, Hiroshima, Japan, 2Department of Obsterics and Gynecology,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Hiroshima, Japan
Background: The mononuclear villous cytotrophoblast fuses and differentiates to the multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast (syncytialization),
which produces hCG and other syncytialization marker proteins. However
the syncytialization process is poorly understood. Syncytin-1, one of the
human endogenous retrovirus envelop protein, is known as a contributor
in the cell fusion process. Forskolin (FSK) elevates intracellular cAMP
concentration and PKA activity, then up-regulated syncytin-1 causes
syncytialization and the secretion of hCG. Classically, cAMP signaling
cascade was considered to be mediated only by PKA, but recently
PKA-independent mechanisms, including the exchange protein directly
activated by cAMP (Epac), were identiﬁed. The aim of our study was to
investigate the participation of PKA and Epac signal cascade in syncytialization of human placental BeWo cells.
Methods: BeWo cells were treated with PKA selective analog (N6-phenylcAMP, Phe), Epac selective cAMP analog (8-pCPT-2’-O-Me-cAMP, CPT). PKA
inhibitor (H-89) was incubated with FSK. The syncytialization activity was
evaluated by the expression of syncytin-1, hCGb mRNA and protein,
production of hCGb. Cell fusion was determined by a quantitative ﬂow
cytometry assay.
Results: Phe increased the expression of syncytin-1/hCGb mRNA, protein
and hCGb secretion in the same level of FSK stimulation. Cell fusion was
also increased by Phe and FSK, whereas CPT did not stimulate mRNA
expression or cell fusion. H89 suppressed the expression of syncytin-1/
hCGb mRNA and cell fusion, to the same level of non-stimulated FSK
(Control).
Conclusions: cAMP-mediated syncytialization is caused by PKA signaling
passway dominantly.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A76

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.120

P1.121

SYNEPITHELIOCHORIAL PLACENTAL INTERACTIONS IN EGFP
CLONED CATTLE MODEL

INDUCTION OF IGFBP-1 EXPRESSION BY CAMP IS ASSOCIATED
WITH HISTONE ACETYLATION STATUS OF THE PROMOTER
REGION IN HUMAN ENDOMETRIAL STROMAL CELLS

Lilian J Oliveira1, Rodrigo Barreto1, Fabiana Bressan1, Flávio V Meirelles1,
Maria Angelica Miglino1, Flávia T V Pereira2
1
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil, 2Paulista State University
UNESP, Dracena, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil, 3University of Southern Denmark,
Odense, Denmark, Denmark
Objective: To investigate the mechanisms by foetal cells interact and
transfer their contents to the maternal compartment in the bovine
placenta using a model of cloned transgenic enhanced Green Fluorescent
Protein (eGFP) expressing bovine embryos.
Methods: EGFP-expressing embryos were produced and transfer into
surrogate cow. The uteri were surgically recovered at days 60 (N¼3) and 90
(N¼3) of pregnancy. Placentome/endometrium samples and maternal
peripheral blood leukocyte (PBL) samples were collected to assess the
presence of fDNA by nested-PCR for eGFP and testis-speciﬁc Y-encoded
protein (TSPY), immunohistochemistry, transmission electron microscopy
and western blotting analysis.
Results: eGFP DNA was present in PBL at day 60 and 90 of pregnancy
conﬁrming that there is transplacental transfer of fDNA to the mother.
Interestingly, eGFP was found to be present at protein and DNA levels in
the intercaruncular epithelium, suggesting that eGFP is delivered to the
maternal side even in the regions where the cells are loosely attached.
Moreover, at local level eGFP was highly expressed by the trophoblast;
however it was also present in the uterine epithelium (UE) facing the
trophoblast. In the arcade zone at the syncytial plaques, the expression of
eGFP by both tissues was less intense than in the neighbouring cells. Our
eGFP construct possessed an ubiquitin promoter. Ubiquitin is not
expressed by invasive cells in human, which might explain the weak
staining of eGFP in the syncytial plaques. Additionally, trophoblast cells
closer to UE showed decreased cytoplasmic area and ﬂattened nucleus,
suggesting that maternal cells respond to foetal signals undergoing to
apoptosis.
Conclusion: Our results showed that the eGFP is delivered to maternal
side at local and systemic levels. Since eGFP does not have a signal peptide,
it is suggested that eGFP could be delivered to the maternal side through
transtrophoblastic water channels that are present in the ruminant
placenta.

Isao Tamura, Norihiro Sugino
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yamaguchi University Graduate
School of Medicine,, Minamikogushi 1-1-1, Ube, Japan
Objectives: Many genes are up or down-regulated in human endometrial
stromal cells (ESC) undergoing decidualization. Expressions of insulin-like
growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) and prolactin (PRL) are preferentially induced with decidualization, and are recognized as speciﬁc
markers of decidualization. This study investigated the involvement of
epigenetic mechanisms in the regulation of IGFBP-1 and PRL induction by
decidualization in ESC.
Methods: (1) ESC isolated from the proliferative phase endometrium were
incubated with cAMP to induce decidualization. To examine whether
IGFBP-1 and PRL expressions can be induced by cAMP in the cell that is not
derived from the endometrium, human dermal ﬁbroblasts (HDF) were
cultured with cAMP. (2) DNA methylation and histone acetylation status of
the promoter were analyzed by sodium bisulﬁte genomic sequencing and
ChIP assay, respectively. (3) FBC were cultured with cAMP in the presence
or absence of a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor and thereafter
IGFBP-1 mRNA expression and C/EBP-b promoter binding were examined.
Results: (1) IGFBP-1 and PRL expressions were induced by cAMP in ESC.
PRL mRNA expression, but not IGFBP-1, was induced by cAMP in HDF. (2)
Histone acetylation levels of the IGFBP-1 promoter region were higher in
ESC compared with HDF. Both cells showed similar DNA hypomethylation
status of the IGFBP-1 promoter region. There were no differences in
histone acetylation levels and DNA methylation status of the promoter and
enhancer region of PRL between both cells. (3) Co-treatment with cAMP
and HDAC inhibitor in HDF induced IGFBP-1 expression with increased
histone acetylation levels and recruitment of C/EBP-b to the promoter
region of IGFBP-1.
Conclusions: Histone acetylation status of the IGFBP-1 promoter region is
important for IGFBP-1 gene expression. High histone acetylation status of
the IGFBP-1 promoter region induces loose chromatin structure of the
promoter region, which allows the recruitment of transcription factors to
the promoter region.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.122

P1.123

ROLE OF RTL1 IN HUMAN PLACENTA: PLACENTAL STUDY IN
AFFECTED CASES WITH STRUCTURAL ABNORMALITY OF THE
IMPRINTED REGION ON HUMAN CHROMOSOME 14

METHYLATION PROFILE OF C19MC-MIRNA CPG ISLAND IN
TROPHOBLAST CELL LINES

Masayo Kagami1, Kentarou Matsuoka2, Maki Fukami1, Michiko Yamanaka3,
Kenji Kurosawa4, Nobuhiro Suzumori5, Toshiro Nagai6, Yoichi Sekita7,
Mami Miyado1, Fumiko Kato1,8, Keiko Matsubara1, Tomoko Fuke1, Tsutomu
Ogata1,8
1
Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Pathology,
National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan, 3Division
of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 4Division of Medical Genetics, Kanagawa Children’s Medical
Center, Yokohama, Japan, 5Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Nagoya
City University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan, 6Department
of Pediatrics, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Koshigaya, Japan,
7
Department of Epigenetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Tokyo, Japan, 8Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu
University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan
Human chromosome 14q32.2 region carries a cluster of imprinted genes
including paternal expressed genes (PEGs) such as DLK1, RTL1, DIO3, and
maternal expressed genes (MEGs) such as MEG3, RTL1as, MEG8, microRNAs
and snoRNAs, together with DLK1-MEG3 intergenic differentially methylated region (IG-DMR) and MEG3-DMR. Paternal uniparental disomy for
human chromosome 14 (UPD(14)pat) in which the expression of PEGs and
MEGs are increased and absent, respectively, results in placentomegaly.
However, the functions and the regulatory mechanisms of the imprinted
genes at 14q32.2 are still unknown. Here, we performed placental study of
two cases with UPD(14)pat, a case with maternal microdeletion involving
DLK1, DMRs and MEG3 and a case with paternal duplication of 14q32.2
imprinted region. RTL1 and DLK1 expressed only in endothelial cells and
pericytes of villous vessels. In the placentas of UPD(14)pat revealing placentomegaly, the expression of DLK1 and RTL1 increased, even though in
the placenta of a case with maternal microdeletion revealing placentomegaly, only the expression of RTL1 increased. Electron microscopic study
showed hyperplasia of the endothelial cells and the pericytes in the
placentas of UPD(14)pat. Expression analysis using fresh placental samples
of UPD(14)pat showed excessive RTL1 expression from 6 to 9-folds above
the normal control levels because of a synergic effect between the biallelic
activation of RTL1 and loss of functional microRNA-containing RTL1as as
a repressor for RTL1. These results indicate that excessive RTL1 expression
causes placentomegaly and RTL1 expression is regulated through an RNAi
mechanism. RTL1 may play an essential role in the development of human
placenta.

A77

Kunio Kikuchi1, Guangjin Qu1,2, Hironori Takahashi1,3, Tomoyuki Kuwata3,
Rie Usui3, Akihide Ohkuchi3, Shan-shun Luo2, Shigeki Matsubara3,
Mitsuaki Suzuki3, Toshihiro Takizawa1
1
Department of Molecular Anatomy and Medicine, Nippon Medical School,
Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Cardiology, First Clinical College of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, China, China, 3Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi, Japan
Objective: MicroRNA (miRNA) is noncoding RNAs that bind to the 3’
untranslated region of target mRNA and regulate its translation. MiRNAs
derived from the chromosome 19 miRNA cluster (C19MC-miRNAs) are
exclusively expressed in the human placenta. The expression of C19MCmiRNAs has been considered to be highly correlated with the methylation state of a CpG island (cytosine/guanine-rich regions of DNA) located
about 18 kb upstream of the C19MC-miRNA genes (Noguer-Dance et al.
Hum Mol Genet 19: 3566-3582, 2010). In this study, we examined the
methylation status of the CpG-island with C19MC-miRNA expression
levels in trophoblast cell lines.
Methods: HTR8/SVneo, BeWo, and JEG3 were used to assess methylation
status. Genomic DNA was extracted from samples. After sodium bisulﬁte
treatment, the DNA regions of C19MC were ampliﬁed and sequenced to
identify the CpG methylation proﬁle. As inhibitor of DNA methylation,
5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine was used. The expression levels of C19MC- miRNAs
were quantiﬁed by real-time PCR. Human full-term placentas were also
obtained according to protocols approved by the Nippon Medical School
Hospital Ethics Committee and the Jichi Medical University Ethics
Committee.
Results: In BeWo and JEG3 cells as models of villous trophoblast, the CpG
island located about 18 kb upstream of the C19MC-miRNA genes was
hypomethylated, and C19MC- miRNAs (e.g., miR-517a) were highly
expressed. This is consistent with the in vivo ﬁndings that the CpG island
was hypomethylated in human full-term placentas that were highly
expressed C19MC- miRNAs. On the other hand, in HTR8/SVneo cell as
a model of extravillous trophoblast, the CpG island was hypermethylated,
and C19MC- miRNAs were hardly detected. After the treatment with
5-aza-2’-deoxycitidine, the expression of C19MC-miRNAs was rejuvenated
in HTR8/SVneo cells.
Conclusion: Our in vitro ﬁndings suggest that the methylation status of
the CpG-island with C19MC-miRNA expression levels is altered with
trophoblast differentiation along the invasive pathway, i.e., extravillous.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A78

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P1.124

P1.125

DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSION OF MIRNAS IN PLACENTA FROM
EARLY AND LATE ONSET PREECLAMPSIA VERSES CONTROLS

THE MICRORNAS MIR27A AND MIR143 REGULATE PLACENTAL
AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER MRNA LEVELS

Mina Susanne Weedon-Fekjær1,3, Ying Sheng4, Florian Herse5, Robert
Lyle4, Meryam Sugulle3, Ralf Dechend5, Anne Cathrine Staff2,3
1
The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway,
2
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of
Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Dept.
of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Experimental
and Clinical Research Center and HELIOS Clinic, Berlin, Germany

Tejal Bhatt1, Robert Murray1, Karen Lillycrop1, Mark Hanson1,3, The
Southampton Womans Survey Study Group2, Cyrus Cooper2, Keith
Godfrey2,3, Rohan Lewis1, Jane Cleal1
1
Institute of Developmental Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK, 2MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK, 3NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research
Centre, University of Southampton and University Hospital Southampton
NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK

Objectives: miRNAs are a group of small non-coding RNAs that play
important roles in the regulation of physiological functions both in health
and disease by post-transcriptional silencing of target mRNAs. miRNAs are
abundantly expressed in placenta with a large cluster of miRNAs on
chromosome 19 being highly speciﬁc for placenta. A few studies have
investigated the differential expression of miRNAs in preeclamptic (PE)
placenta, but with somewhat conﬂicting results. The aim of this study was
to investigate the differential expression of miRNAs in early and late-onset
PE compared to controls using high throughput sequencing.
Methods: Preeclamptic and control placenta samples were obtained
during caesarean section from an ongoing biobank collection of patient
samples at Oslo University Hospital, Ullevaal. Following sample preparation, 23 normotensive controls, 23 early-onset preeclamptic (gestational
week <34) and 26 late-onset preeclamptic (week 34) samples were
sequenced using Illumina sequencing technology. The reads were assigned
to known human miRNAs from miRBase (release 18) using miRanalyzer
and differential expressed miRNAs were identiﬁed using the DESeq
package in R.
Results: Of the w1500 miRNAs identiﬁed in humans, w800 miRNAs were
detected in our placenta samples. There were 10 miRNAs that were
differentially expressed between controls and PE (p-value <0.1). Nine of
the differentially expressed genes were found between controls and
early-onset preeclampsia patients, while only miR-210 was differentially
regulated between late-onset preeclampsia patients and controls.
Approximately 20% of the reads mapping to miRNAs stemmed from the
placenta speciﬁc chromosome 19 cluster, conﬁrming the reliability of the
results.
Conclusion: The preliminary results conﬁrmed some of previous results
and provide new insights about miRNA regulation in preeclampsia. All
these results suggest that miRNAs are involved in the regulation of mRNAs
in preeclampsia, especially in the early-onset type.

Objective: The amino acid transporter TAT1 mediates efﬂux of speciﬁc
amino acids across the basal membrane (BM) of the placental syncytiotrophoblast into the fetal circulation. In placentas from Southampton
Women’s Survey (SWS) pregnancies the mRNA levels of TAT1 are positively related to several measures of fetal growth. The small non-coding
microRNAs (miRNAs) miR27a and miR143 are predicted to regulate TAT1
expression. This study investigated whether miR27a and miR143 are
related to placental mRNA expression levels of TAT1 which may have sex
speciﬁc expression, as well as the amino acid transport systems A, L and
ASC.
Methods: Ethical approval for this study was granted by the Southampton
and Southwest Hampshire Local Research Ethics Committee. Tissue
samples were collected from human placentas (53 male, 47 female infants)
from the SWS. Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) was used to measure the
expression of the miRNAs miR27a and miR143 normalized to the
geometric mean of the housekeeping genes SNORD6-1 and RNU6-2.
Pearson’s correlation (rp) was used to explore the relationship between
placental miRNA expression levels and amino acid transporter mRNA
levels.
Results: MiR27a expression negatively correlated with TAT1 (rp¼-0.28,
p¼0.04) and ASC1 (rp¼-0.33, p¼0.02) mRNA expression in male but not
female placentas. MiR27a positively correlated with LAT2 mRNA in both
male and female placentas (rp¼0.34, p¼0.01; rp¼0.35, p¼0.02 respectively). MiR143 correlated with placental/fetal birth weight ratio (rp¼-0.28,
p¼0.04) in male placentas.
Conclusions: This data suggest that these miRNAs are involved in the
regulation of amino acid transporter mRNA expression and may inﬂuence
the transfer of amino acids to the fetus. By inﬂuencing the supply of amino
acids to the fetus placental miRNAs may regulate fetal growth and
underpin sex differences in mRNA levels and placental function.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.1

P2.2

INCREASING EVIDENCE FOR THE ROLE OF PLACENTAL RENIN
ANGIOTENSIN SYSTEM (RAS) IN PRE-ECLAMPSIA

DISRUPTION OF NRF2 SIGNALING DUE TO DECREASED
EXPRESSION OF LECTIN-LIKE OXIDIZED LDL RECEPTOR 1
(LOX-1) IS INVOLVED IN PREECLAMPSIA

Hiten Mistry1, Lesia Kurlak2, Fiona Broughton Pipkin2
1
Division of Women’s Health, King’s College London, London, UK, 2Division
of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Objectives: Oxidative stress and increased prorenin receptor (PRR) both
enhance the cleavage of angiotensin I from angiotensinogen (AGT). We
have previously reported speciﬁc clustering of PRR in conjunction with
reduced antioxidant glutathione peroxidase (GPx) activity1. Within the
pre-eclamptic placenta, an increase in angiotensin II acting at the type 1
receptor (AT1R) may lead to increased vasoconstriction with a reduction in
the growth of the fetus.
Hypothesis: Pre-eclampsia (PE), an increased state of oxidative stress, will
be associated with increased placental AT1R protein expression leading to
reduced infant birthweight.
Methods: Biopsies were taken 1cm from the placental edge from 27
normotensive (NT) and 23 PE White European women following informed
written consent. Immunohistochemistry was performed on parafﬁnembedded serial sections using antibodies to AGT, PRR, AT1R and AT2R.
Protein expression was semi-quantitatively assessed (H-score) and
compared between groups, to birthweights and to previously measured
placental GPx 3 protein expression2.
Results: AT1R expression was increased in PE placentae with a negative
association with birthweight (r¼ -0.529, P¼0.009). In NT, AT1R expression
was negatively correlated with GPx3 expression (r¼-0.865, P¼0.003), an
association not seen in PE. All other RAS components were similarly
expressed in both groups.

Protein expression

AGT
PRR
AT1R
AT2R
*

H-score (median [interquartile range])
NT

PE

34 [10,95]
117 [16,144]
40 [10,70]
152 [120,180]

30 [9,60]
139 [72,187]
68 [30,112]*
184 [74,220]

A79

Yoshitsugu Chigusa, Keiji Tatsumi, Eiji Kondoh, Kohei Fujita, Fumitomo
Nishimura, Mari Ujita, Kaoru Kawasaki, Haruta Mogami, Ikuo Konishi
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
Objectives: The serum concentration of oxidized LDL (oxLDL) is higher in
women with preeclampsia than in normal pregnant woman. Lectin-like
oxLDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) is one of the scavenger receptors for oxLDL
and is abundantly expressed in placenta. Oxidized LDL activates nuclear
factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), a master regulator of antioxidant
and cytoprotective genes such as heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). However it
has yet to be elucidated whether LOX-1, along with Nrf2, participates in the
pathology of preeclampsia. Our objective is to assess LOX-1 expression and
Nrf2 signaling in preeclamptic placentas and to manifest their physiological roles in preeclampsia.
Methods: Expressions of LOX-1, HO-1, and Nrf2 activation were evaluated
by quantitative RT-PCR or Western blotting in placental tissues and JAR,
a choriocarcinoma cell line. The functions of LOX-1 and Nrf2 were examined using an anti-LOX-1 antibody and Nrf2 activator in JAR cells or
placental explants.
Results: LOX-1, HO-1 mRNA and Nrf2 activation were signiﬁcantly
decreased in preeclamptic placentas compared with normal controls.
Signiﬁcant decrease in LOX-1 mRNA was found in placental explants under
hypoxic conditions. Activation of Nrf2 up-regulated HO-1 expression in
both explants and JAR cells. Furthermore, oxLDL enhanced nuclear accumulation of Nrf2, and increased HO-1 expression, whereas blockade of
LOX-1 inhibited the increase of HO-1 mRNA in JAR cells.
Conclusion: Nrf2 activation is an appropriate reaction to oxidative stress.
However, decreasing LOX-1 expression in preeclamptic placenta can
inhibit Nrf2 activation, and can contribute to reduced HO-1 expression.
Moreover, reduced LOX-1 expression in preeclamptic placenta may cause
maternal high oxLDL concentration. These ﬁndings provide novel insights
into the crucial role of LOX-1 and Nrf2 in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.

P ¼ 0.032, NT compared to PE.

Conclusion: PE is associated with raised AT1R expression. In NT placentae,
GPx3 may attenuate the vasocontrictive action of the AT1R whereas in PE,
GPx3 levels are signiﬁcantly lower and therefore may be insufﬁcient to
provide this inhibition thus compromising fetal growth.

1. Kurlak LO et al, (2011) Preg Hyper 1;278
2. Mistry HD et al, (2010) Placenta 31:401-408

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A80

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.3

P2.4

SOLUBLE ENDOGLIN INHIBITS EVT FUNCTIONS VIA
AUTOPHAGY UNDER HYPOXIA, RESULTING IN PREECLAMPSIA

EXPRESSION OF ANGIOGENESIS-RELATED FACTORS AND
INFLAMMATORY CYTOKINES IN PLACENTA AND UMBILICAL
VESSELS IN PREGNANCIES WITH PREECLAMPSIA AND
CHORIOAMNIONITIS/FUNISITIS

Akitoshi Nakashima, Tomoko Shima, Kumiko Inada, Shigeru Saito
University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan
Objectives: Impaired extravillous trophoblast (EVT) invasion of myometrial spiral arteries is believed to be the main cause of preeclampsia
(PE), although the cause of poor placentation remains largely unknown. In
early pregnancy, trophoblast and fetus experience hypoxic and lownutrient condition. We have studied whether autophagy, an intracellular
bulk degradation system, play some roles in the early placentation.
METOHDS: We have established autophagy-defect EVT cell lines by
Atg4B-mutant transfer.
Results: Autophagy was detected in primary cultured EVT and EVT cell
lines under hypoxia (2% O2) and EVT in early pregnancy decidual tissue at
a distal site by Western blot analysis, immunoﬂuorescent staining and/or
election microscope. The invasion of autophagy-defect EVT cells was
impaired in hypoxic condition (2% O2) (14250 vs 26573, p¼0.0001), but
not in 20% O2. To investigate the vascular remodeling by EVT, tube
formation assay by EVT and HUVEC was performed under 8% oxygen
tension. The vascular remodeling rates by autophagy-defect EVT were
signiﬁcantly lower than those by wild type cell (804% vs 426%,
p<0.001). Interestingly, 100ng/ml soluble endoglin, which is close to the
serum level of severe preeclampsia patients, remarkably inhibited
hypoxia-induced autophagy in EVT (523.2% suppression, p<0.01). In the
functional assays, sEng signiﬁcantly decreased the number of invaded cell
in wild type EVT cell, but not in autophagy-defect EVT under hypoxia.
Furthermore, the vascular formation rates by wild type EVT was signiﬁcantly suppressed by sEng under hypoxia, similar to the level by
autophagy-defect EVT (804% vs 355%, p<0.001). Finally, the expression
of p62, an substance selectively degraded by autophagy, was signiﬁcantly
increased in EVT cells of placental bed biopsy samples obtained from
preeclampsia patients, compared to that in normal pregnancy (3216.7%
vs 8.55.8%, p¼0.0005), suggesting the impaired autophagy in EVT in
preeclampsia.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report showing that autophagy impairment by
sEng contributes to shallow placentation in preeclampsia.

Atsuko Taki1, Motohiro Komaki1, Kikuko Oku2, Sachiko Iseki1, Mayumi
Abe1, Shuki Mizutani1, Ikuo Morita1
1
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan, 2Kawaguchi Municipal
Medical Hospital, Kawaguchi-city, Saitama, Japan
Objective: We hypothecate that gene expression in placenta and umbilical
vessels are affected by intrauterine environment and some of expression in
umbilical vessels originating from the fetus could reﬂect fetal condition of
these complicated pregnancies. Expression of angiogenesis-related factors
and inﬂammatory cytokines were examined in placenta and umbilical
vessels in order to clarify the effects of intrauterine environment of
pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia and chorioamnionitis/funisitis.
Study Design: Forty-six preterm Caesarean section deliveries were classiﬁed into three groups based on maternal condition during prenatal
monitoring: preeclampsia (PE) (n¼11), chorioamnionitis/funisitis (CAM)
(n¼8), and preterm control (PC) (n¼27). Angiogenesis-related factors and
inﬂammatory cytokines in placenta, umbilical arteries and umbilical veins
were analyzed by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.
Results: We demonstrated that Ang-2, Tie-2, and Dll4 increase in the
placentas of PE compared to PC for the ﬁrst time, and we conﬁrmed the
ﬁndings of previous reports showing the high expression of HIF-1a, sFlt-1,
endoglin, leptin, and AT1R. Expression of Angiogenesis-related factors,
including HIF-1a, VEGF, angiopoietin, and TGF-b systems, and inﬂammatory cytokines, such as TNF-a and IL-6, increased in umbilical vessels of PE.
Umbilical veins of CAM showed a higher Dll4 level than did PC.
Conclusions: In preeclampsia, abnormal expressions of angiogenesisrelated factors related to lifestyle diseases in adulthood were seen in the
placenta and umbilical vessels as compared to PC. Chorioamnionitis/
funisitis showed only upregulation of DII4 in umbilical veins.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A81

P2.5

P2.6

CIRCULATING ENDOTHELIAL PROGENITOR CELLS AND
PLACENTAL ABRUPTION IN WOMEN WITH PREECLAMPSIA

HYDROXYSTEROID (17-BETA) DEHYDROGENASE 1 (HSD17B1) IS
DYSREGULATED BY MIR-210 AND MIR-518C IN THE HUMAN
PLACENTA COMPLICATED WITH PREECLAMPSIA: PLASMA
LEVELS OF HSD17B1 AS A NOVEL MARKER FOR PREDICTING
LATE-ONSET PREECLAMPSIA

Tomohisa Sakashita, Yukihito Higashi, Junko Soga, Hisaya Fujiwara, Yoshiki
Kudo
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan
Objectives: Placental abruption is one of the most signiﬁcant causes of
both maternal and perinatal mortality and morbidity. However, prediction
marker has not been established. Abnormalities in circulating angiogenic
factors and endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) have been reported in
preeclampsia and placental abruption. The objective of this study is to
compare the level of EPCs in women with preeclampsia and in women
with preeclampsia complicated by placental abruption.
Methods: Subject are Japanese singleton pregnant women with
preeclampsia (n ¼ 27) and without any complications (n ¼ 15). The EPC
(CD45lowCD34þCD133þ cells) counts were examined by ﬂow cytometry in
peripheral blood collected from 27 women with preeclampsia and 15
normal pregnants. Out of 27 women with preeclampsia, ﬁve women
subsequently developed placental abruption. All subjects were then
divided into three groups: normal pregnancy (NP, n¼15), preeclampsia
without placenta abruption (PE, n¼22), and preeclampsia with placental
abruption (PA, n¼5).
Results: The EPC counts in the PE group signiﬁcantly decreased compared
to the NP group (620 counts/ml versus 1918 counts/ml, P<0.01). In the PA
group, the EPC counts markedly decreased compared to the PE group (221
counts/ml, P<0.05).
Conclusions: The numbers of EPCs were signiﬁcantly decreased in the
preeclamptic women who subsequently developed placental abruption.
The circulating EPCs might serve as a prediction marker of placental
abruption.

Toshihiro Takizawa1, Akihide Ohkuchi2, Md. Moksed Ali1, Shan-Shun Luo3,
Takami Takizawa1, Makoto Migita4, Gen Ishikawa5, Shigeki Matsubara2,
Toshiyuki Takeshita5
1
Dept Molecular Medicine & Anatomy, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo,
Japan, 2Dept Obstetrics & Gynecology, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi,
Japan, 3Dept Cardiology, First Clinical College of Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, China, 4Dept Pediatrics, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan,
5
Dept Obstetrics & Gynecology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: The purpose of this study was to elucidate novel mechanisms
of microRNA (miRNA) underlying the molecular pathology of preeclampsia
(PE), and identify novel prognostic factors for PE.
Methods: We performed a comparative analysis of miRNA expression
between normal and preeclamptic placentas by the combination of largescale, high-throughput sequencing and quantitative PCR-based array
analysis to identify miRNAs that were aberrantly expressed in
preeclamptic placentas, i.e., PE-related miRNAs. We validated a target for
these miRNAs. Furthermore, we investigated whether the target can serve
as a novel marker for the prediction of PE, especially late-onset PE.
Results: By comprehensive analyses of miRNA expression, we identiﬁed 22
miRNAs signiﬁcantly upregulated in preeclamptic placentas, ﬁve of which
were predicted in silico to commonly target the mRNA encoding hydroxysteroid (17-beta) dehydrogenese 1 (HSD17B1), a steroidogenetic enzyme
expressed predominantly in the placenta. In vivo HSD17B1 expression, at
both the mRNA and protein levels, was signiﬁcantly decreased in
preeclamptic placentas. Of these miRNAs, miR-210 and miR-518c were
experimentally validated to target HSD17B1 by luciferase assay, real-time
PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Furthermore, we found
that plasma HSD17B1 protein levels in preeclamptic pregnant women
reﬂected the decrease of its placental expression. Moreover, a prospective
cohort study of plasma HSD17B1 revealed that there was a signiﬁcant
difference in plasma HSD17B1 protein levels between the two groups even
at 20–23 weeks of gestation prior to the onset of PE, especially late-onset
PE.
Conclusion: We conclude that HSD17B1 is dysregulated by miR-210 and
miR-518c that are aberrantly expressed in preeclamptic placenta, and that
reducing plasma level of HSD17B1 precedes the onset of PE and is
a potential prognostic factor for PE.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A82

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.7

P2.8

INVESTIGATING GENETIC PREDISPOSITION AND CLINICAL
OCCURRENCE OF PREECLAMPSIA AND CARDIOVASCULAR
DISEASE THROUGH A FAMILY-BASED DESIGN

EXPRESSION OF NON-MUSCLE MYOSIN IIA AND IIB IN NORMAL
AND PREECLAMPTIC HUMAN PLACENTA AND THEIR ROLE IN
TROPHOBLAST CELL MIGRATION

The Norwegian Preeclampsia Family Biobank
Liv Cecilie V. Thomsen1,2, Ann-Charlotte Iversen3, Linda T. Roten3, Ingvill
Lyslo4, Kjersti Tollaksen4, Maria-Lisa Odland3, Kristin M. Strand3, Per
Solberg5, Astrid S. Gundersen3, Chen Sun1,2, Ottar Nygård6,7, Rigmor
Austgulen3, Line Bjørge1,2
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2Department of Clinical Medicine, University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 3Department of Cancer Research and Molecular
Medicine, The Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stavanger
University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway, 5Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Levanger Hospital, Levanger, Norway, 6Institute of Medicine.
Section for Cardiology. University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 7Department
of Medicine. Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway

Ganesh Acharya1,2, Mona Nystad3,1, Vasilis Sitras4,1, Hari Prasad Dhakal5,
Åse Vårtun1, Purusotam Basnet2,1, Kersti K Linask6
1
Women’s Health and Perinatology Research Group, Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Tromsø, Tromsø,
Norway, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Hospital
of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 3Division of Child and Adolescent
Health, Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of North
Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Akershus University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Deparment of Tumour
Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 6Department of Pediatrics, Children’s
Research Institute, University of South Florida, St. Petersburg, USA

Objectives: Preeclampsia is the most frequent pregnancy complication in
the Western world (2-8%) and a major cause of maternal and fetal
morbidity and mortality. A woman with a preeclamptic pregnancy has an
increased risk (2-8 fold) of developing atherosclerosis/cardiovascular
disease (CVD) later in life. Preeclampsia is a complex genetic syndrome and
clustering of the condition in families indicates disease predisposition.
Family studies are recognized as valuable resources to investigate underlying genetics. To examine genetic mechanisms involved in the syndrome
we used a population-wide registry to establish a biobank founded on
a Norwegian family-cohort with increased occurrence of preeclampsia.
Methods: Familial predisposition to preeclampsia was deﬁned as when
a woman and her mother, daughter or sister were registered in the Medical
Birth Registry of Norway as having the disease. The diagnoses were validated by reviewing hospital records. 426 women with validated diagnoses
were invited to participate and include relatives. Information on obstetric
and medical history of participants and their families was gathered and
peripheral blood samples collected from participants. Pedigrees were
recorded and the participants were strictly characterized both as individuals and in a family setting according to phenotype, sub-grouped as:
preeclampsia according to severity, preeclampsia with or without growth
restriction in the offspring (FGR), and preeclampsia with or without CVD or
diabetes development.
Results: The Norwegian Preeclampsia Family Biobank contains information on and samples from 110 families (504 individuals). Majority of the
families contains cases of serious preeclampsia, has several affected family
members, and an identiﬁed accumulation of CVD. The families are further
subdivided according to clinical phenotype as families of aggregated early/late preeclampsia with or without FGR and CVD.
Conclusion: The Norwegian Preeclampsia Family Study, a population- and
family-based cohort study, has led to the founding of a substantial highquality biobank to beneﬁt and promote future research on preeclampsia.

Objective: Non-muscle myosin proteins, NMHC-IIA and -IIB, are known to
be important in the regulation of cell motility and chemotaxis. Our aim was
to study expression of NMHC-IIA and -IIB in normal and preeclamptic
human placentas and to elucidate their possible role in trophoblast cell
migration.
Methods: Placental samples obtained from healthy (n¼16) and severely
preeclamptic (n¼15) women after delivery were ﬁxed, embedded in
parafﬁn and sectioned. Immunostaining was performed using automated
Dako Cytomation EnVision and Duel Link System. Expression of NMHC-IIA
and –IIB in the various placental cell populations was analyzed by
a pathologist who was blinded to the diagnosis and outcome of
pregnancies.
First trimester primary trophoblast cell lines immortalized by SV40 virus
(HTR-8/SVneo) used as a model to study extravillous trophoblast function,
were transfected by siRNA for MYH9 (NMHC-IIA), MYH10 (NMHC-IIB) and
scrambled control siRNA. Scratch wound healing assays were performed to
assess the role of these proteins in trophoblast cell migration.
Results: NMHC-IIA was localized mainly in endothelial cells both in
normal and preeclamptic placentas. It was strongly expressed in polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNC), which were present in higher
numbers in preeclamptic placentas compared to normal. NMHC-IIB
showed a heterogeneous but higher level of expression in preeclamptic
placentas compared to NMHC-IIA. NMHC-IIB was expressed by almost all
extravillous trophoblasts but not by PMNC. Subsyncytial trophoblasts
showed reduced expression of NMHC-IIA compared to NMHC-IIB. Syncytial trophoblasts and syncytial knots did not express these markers except
in some focal areas in case of NMHC IIB. Suppressing the MYH9 and MYH10
expression reduced protein expression as well as the migration capabilities
of ﬁrst trimester trophoblast cell lines.
Conclusion: Non-muscle myosin-IIA and -IIB are differentially expressed
between normal and preeclamptic placentas and appear to affect the ﬁrst
trimester trophoblast cell migration. Their role in the pathogenesis of
preeclampsia needs to be further elucidated.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.9

P2.10

ATORVASTATIN DECREASE SOLUBLE FMS-LIKE TYROSINE
KINASE-1 (SFLT-1) IN HUMAN JEG-3 CHORIOCARCINOMA
CELLS: ROLE OF ENOS/NO PATHWAY

PAPPA2 REGULATES IGF PATHWAY IN PRE-ECLAMPTIC
PLACENTA

Alireza Karimollah, Javad Zavarreza
Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran
Objectives: Recently studies showed that elevated soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1) reduces bio-availability of trophoblast placenta
growth factor (PGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in
Preeclampsia. Although Statins therapy abolishes sFlt-1expression in some
animal model of preeclampsia. But the mechanism of their action is not
known. This study aims to investigate the mechanism by which atorvastatin decrease sFlt-1expression in human JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells.
Methods: JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells were cultured under 21%O2 or 1%O2
conditions in the presence or absence of atorvastatin. Effects on PGF, VEGF,
endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and sFlt-1 mRNA expression were
determined by quantitative real-time PCR. Changes in expression of PGF,
VEGF, sFlt-1 protein were monitored by ELISA. NOx was determined in the
culture media with Griess colorimetric assay.
Results: Hypoxia decreased PGF mRNA but increased VEGF, sFlt-1 mRNA
expression in JEG-3 cells. Atorvastatin treatment under 1%O2 culture
conditions signiﬁcantly reversed sFlt-1 mRNA and protein expression,
Furthermore atorvastatin increased PGF, VEGF protein expression and
nitric oxide production in culture supernatant also levels of eNOS mRNA
expression increased. All of the effects of atorvastatin were attenuated by
preincubation with NOS inhibitor L-NAME.
Conclusions: Atorvastatin decrease sFLT-1 production through upregulation of eNOS in human JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cell culture. Our
data support a role for statins in preeclampsia prevention.

A83

Haruki Nishizawa, Jun Miyazaki, Yukito Minami, Hironori Miyamura, Takao
Sekiya, Shin Tada, Yasuhiro Udagawa
Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan
Objectives: In our current study, we performed genome-wide expression
proﬁling of placental tissue samples, and pregnancy-associated plasma
protein-A2 (PAPPA2) included putative candidate genes associated with
the pathogenesis of pre-eclampsia. PAPP A2 is proteases that cleave
insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-5 (IGFBP-5), resulting in local
activation of IGF signaling pathways. Thus, we compared the placental
expression level of PAPPA2 and IGFBP-5 at both the RNA and protein levels
in women with uncomplicated pregnancies and in those with severe
pre-eclampsia.
Methods: Placental biopsy samples were obtained during Caesarean
sections from both normotensive patients (n ¼ 25) and those with preeclampsia (n ¼ 21) who gave consent for participating in this study.
PAPP-A and IGFBP-5 mRNA and protein levels were determined in
placental tissue and maternal sera using quantitative PCR, Western blot,
ligand blot, immunohistochemistry, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay.
Results: We identiﬁed 137 genes as a result of microarrays analysis and
focused on PAPPA2 as it was one of the most signiﬁcantly up-regulated
genes in the pre-eclamptic placentas. In the additional examination,
PAPPA2 mRNA and protein levels is overexpressed in pre-eclamptic
placental tissues (p<0.01). Maternal serum concentrations of PAPPA2
was also signiﬁcantly elevated in pre-eclampsia as compared to uncomplicated pregnancy. Likewise, mRNA levels of IGFBP5 were also signiﬁcantly increased, suggesting a potential role for IGFBP5 in fetal and
placental growth suppression during pre-eclampsia. However, IGFBP5
protein was not elevated, possibly due to protein cleavage by PAPPA2.
Conclusion: These data suggest that PAPPA2 is a potential disease marker
for pre-eclamptic pregnancy. Our data also suggest that PAPPA2 might be
upregulated in order to compensate for IGFBP5-mediated inactivation of
the local IGF pathway, although compensation may be inadequate to
prevent low birth weight in pre-eclamptic pregnancy.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A84

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.11

P2.12

MOLECULAR EVIDENCE THAT PLACENTAL PATHOLOGY IS
MORE SEVERE IN EARLY-ONSET COMPARED TO LATE-ONSET
PRE-ECLAMPSIA

FETAL BLOOD FLOW, OXYGEN DELIVERY AND CONSUMPTION
IN SUB-CATEGORIES OF PREECLAMPSIA
Stacy Zamudio, Abdulla Al Khan, Manuel Alvarez, Nicholas Illsley
Hackensack University Medical Center, Det. Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Hackensack, NJ, USA

Hong Wa Yung1, Daniel Atkinson1, Matts Olovsson1,2, Graham Burton1
1
Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
Cambridgeshire, UK, 2Department of Women’s and Children’s Health,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

8
6

*

*

4
2

IU
G
R

se

tP
E

PE

on
rl y

Ea

e

on
s

et

N
L

0

La
t

se
on

IU
G
R

tP

E

E

0

tP

IU
G
R

E
tP

on
se
r ly

Ea

La

te

on
se

tP

E

0

*

50

r ly

100

*

Ea

*

N
L

*

100

on
se

*

200

150

te

300

200

La

400

Umbilical vein blood flow
(ml/min/kg fetus)

500

NL

Umbilical vein blood flow
(ml/min)

Objectives: Pre-eclampsia can be classiﬁed into two major subtypes
dependent on the time of onset of the syndrome. Early-onset preeclampsia starts before 34 week of gestation, and is often associated with
intrauterine growth restriction. In contrast, in late-onset pre-eclampsia,
which starts after 34 week, birth weight is normal. Currently, there is
debate as to whether these sub-types reﬂect the same pathophysiology,
but with different severities, or different pathologies based on defective
placentation and increased maternal susceptibility respectively. Here, we
test between these two possibilities by examining molecular markers of
placental endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and oxidative stress.
Methods: Placentas from early-onset (<34 week), late-onset preeclampsia (>34 week) and normotensive controls were collected from
non-laboured, elective caesarean deliveries free of other complications

Fetal O2 consumption
(ml/min/kg)

Objective: Lowered blood ﬂow is thought to contribute to feto-placental
hypoxia, reduced fetal growth and long-term health consequences in
placental complications of pregnancy (preeclampsia–PE/Intrauterine
growth restriction–IUGR). Early-onset PE is considered a more severe
clinical entity. Disease severity is believed to correlate with the degree of
compromise in blood ﬂow, but this has never been formally tested.
Methods: We measured volumetric umbilical venous blood ﬂow (Doppler
and ultrasound, ml/min) in 122 normal (NL) and 48 complicated pregnancies (n¼28 late-onset PE [>34 wk], n¼13 early onset PE, n¼13 IUGR
without PE) within 72 hours prior to cesarean delivery. Cord blood samples
from the artery (umb a.) and vein (umb V.) were analyzed for blood gases,
hemoglobin. Oxygen content was calculated as Hgb (gm/dL) * 1.36 *
oxygen saturation (%). We then calculated fetal O2 delivery and
consumption. One-way ANOVA/Dunett’s post-test was used to compare
pathologies to the normal group and are presented as mean  SEM.

Ă

with informed patient consent and local ethical approval. Western blotting
analysis was used to examine changes of expression and phosphorylation
of protein and kinases involved in ER and oxidative stress, and survival/
growth signalling pathways. Differences were tested for using a one-way
ANOVA.
Results: There were signiﬁcant increases (p < 0.05) in ER stress markers
P-eIF2a, GRP78 and GRP94, oxidative stress markers P-HSP27, HSP70 and
HSP90, and stress kinase P-p38, in early onset pre-eclamptic placentas
compared to normotensive controls. There was also a signiﬁcant decrease
of the growth and survival kinases P-AKT and P-ERK. No signiﬁcant
differences were observed between late-onset preeclampsia and normotensive controls.
Conclusion: These results demonstrate a clear difference in the molecular
pathology of placentas from cases of early- and late-onset pre-eclampsia.
Previous work has shown a strong correlation between activation of
markers of ER stress and the severity of the initiating insult in trophoblastlike cells. We conclude that early-onset pre-eclampsia is likely to be
associated with deﬁcient placentation, whereas the late-onset subtype is
due to increased maternal endothelial susceptibility.
Supported by the Welcome Trust (084804/2/08/Z).

Results: Abnormal umb. a. Dopplers were present in 0%, 46%, 72% and 57%
of NL, late-, early-onset PE and IUGR, respectively. Birth weights were at
the 51st8th 26th5th, 25th7th, and 3rd0.8th centile in NL, late-, earlyonset PE and IUGR, respectively. Absolute Umb V. blood ﬂow was
reduced by 45-60%, but was similar across all pathologies (left panel).
However, when ﬂow was normalized to fetal weight, it was reduced only
in IUGR (center panel). Fetal O2 consumption was reduced by 28% lateonset PE and 37% in IUGR whilst the 25% difference in early onset-PE
was not signiﬁcant (right panel), due to greater variability in O2
consumption in early-onset PE. IUGR in this study appears to have the
greatest pathological reduction in ﬂow and O2. The data also suggest that
factor other than hypoxia/ﬂow/O2 delivery account for disease severity in
PE. Support: NIH HD042737, HD046982, NSF BCS0309142.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.13

P2.14

CELL-TYPE SPECIFIC ACTIVATION OF UNFOLDED PROTEIN
RESPONSE PATHWAYS IN PRE-ECLAMPTIC PLACENTAS

APOPTOTIC AND NECROTIC CELL DEATH OF TROPHOBLAST
AND ADIPOSE TISSUE ON HYPOXIA AND PREECLAMPSIA – A
PRELIMINARY OBSERVATION

Hong Wa Yung1, Tim Campion-Smith1, Matts Olovsson1,2, Graham Burton1
Centre for Trophoblast Research, Cambridge, Cambridgshire, UK,
2
Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden

A85

1

Katsuhiko Naruse, Taihei Tsunemi, Toshiyuki Sado, Juria Akasaka, Natsuki
Koike, Fuminori Ito, Taketoshi Noguchi, Hidekazu Oi, Hiroshi Kobayashi
OB/GYN, Nara Medical University, Kashihara, Nara, Japan

Objectives: The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) plays a crucial role in integrating cell responses to a variety of stressors through activation of the
unfolded protein response (UPR). Three proximity sensors located at the
ER membrane, including PERK-eIF2a, ATF6 and IRE1a-XPB1, are activated
sequentially in response to increasing severity of stress. Although there is
considerable overlap and cross-talk, these pathways mediate different
aspects of the UPR, from suppression of translation to induction of
apoptosis. We recently reported evidence of activation of the UPR in
placentas from cases of intrauterine growth restriction, with and without
pre-eclampsia. Here, we immunolocalised the UPR response pathways to
speciﬁc cell types in pathological placentas.
Methods: Non-laboured placental samples were collected from normotensive controls and early-onset pre-eclamptic (PE) pregnancies delivered
by caesarean section, with informed patient consent and local ethical
committee approval. Samples were immediately ﬁxed in paraformaldehyde for immunohistochemical analysis, or snap-frozen in liquid
nitrogen for Western blotting. Immunoreactivity was assessed by H-score,
by an observer blinded to the sample type.
Results: Total IRE1a was expressed ubiquitously in all cell types in both
control and PE placentas, whereas immunoreactivity for P-IRE1a was
observed only in smooth muscle cells (SMC) in the wall of stem villous
arteries in PE placentas. In contrast, ATF6 was expressed in both endothelial cells and syncytiotrophoblast, but not in SMCs. Cleaved ATF6 is
a potent transcription factor, and nuclear localisation of ATF6 was observed
in endothelial cells in PE placentas, but not in syncytiotrophoblast.
Western blotting detected a signiﬁcant increase of full length ATF6 (p90),
cleaved ATF6 (p50) and XBP-1 in pre-eclamptic placentas.
Conclusions: These results indicate differential activation of UPR signalling pathways in different placental cell types in pre-eclampsia. This
ﬁnding indicates that responses to ER stress may be heterogeneous across
placental cell types.
Supported by the Wellcome Trust (084804/2/08/Z).

Objectives: Hypoxia is a key feature of preeclampsia (PIH) in the third
trimester of pregnancy. However, there have been few studies about the
effect of low oxygen environment on primary trophoblast from placenta.
Additionally, there are new ﬁndings on adipose tissue-derived cytokines
(adipocytokine) in preeclampsia have been reported. In this study, we
performed primary trophoblast culture under hypoxic condition and
adipose tissue culture with preeclamptic serum, and examined the cell
death markers to investigate apoptosis / necrosis of the tissues in
preeclampsia.
Methods: Placenta (38 weeks gestation, n¼5) and subcutaneous adipose
tissue were obtained at elective caesarean section. Serum were obtained
from severe preeclampsia and gestational age-matched normal pregnancy(n¼5 each) after written informed consent. Cytotrophoblast was
separated with Percoll-based method, cultured on ﬁbronectin for 24 hours
and attached cells were cultured under 20%, 5%, and 0.1% oxygen condition
for additional 24 hours. Cytotoxicity was observed with LDH assay. Adipose
tissues were dissected, harvested in collagen gel and 10% preeclamptic/
normal human serum-contained media for 24 hours after overnight
starvation. Concentrations of M65 (marker of all cell death) and M30
(Apoptosis) proteins were measured with ELISA.
Results: Cytotoxicity observed in trophoblast was reduced in 5% oxygen
condition, and reduced more in 0.1% severe hypoxia. Concentrations of
M30 protein derived from adipose tissues showed no signiﬁcant difference
between preeclamptic and normal pregnant serum. However, M65 protein
concentrations were signiﬁcantly lower in preeclamptic culture than
normal pregnant serum-added culture.
Conclusion: Hypoxia in placenta may lead protective effect in primary
trophoblast from term placenta, which suggesting that the physiological
oxygen concentration for trophoblast may be low and hypoxia is not a key
trigger of cell death. Cell death on adipose tissue-culture was observed
and apoptotic cell ratio (M30/M65) was high in preeclamptic serum.
Exaggerated production of adipocytokines in preeclampsia may be related
to this observation.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A86

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.15

P2.16

REGULATION OF PLACENTAL CONNEXINS 43 AND 46 UPON
LOW OXYGEN AND ITS IMPACT ON PREECLAMPSIA

MORPHOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF THE DIFFERENCES IN
PLACENTAL ANGIOGENESIS DURING EARLY AND
LATE-ONSET PRE-ECLAMPSIA

Alexandra Gellhaus1, Teresa Otto1, Nadine Wolf1, Jan Scheidler1, Kerstin
Boengler2, Caroline Dunk3, Markus Schmidt4, Rainer Kimmig4, Klaus
Lennartz5, Elke Winterhager1, Stephanie Kaiser1
1
University of Duisburg-Essen, Molecular Biology, Essen, Germany,
2
University of Duisburg-Essen, Pathophysiology, Essen, Germany,
3
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto,
Canada, 4Gynecology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany, 5Cell
Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany
Objectives: While Cx43 regulates trophoblast fusion, Cx40 is needed for
the proliferation of the extravillous trophoblast (EVT) which migrates into
the maternal compartment. In preeclampsia trophoblast invasion is
disturbed resulting in placental insufﬁciency and chronic hypoxia.
Methods and Results: Here we investigated whether the expression of
placental connexins (Cxs) changes upon low oxygen. We found for the ﬁrst
time Cx46 expressed in the placenta, a connexin which is predominantly
detected in lens and is important for the cell survival under hypoxia. First
hints that these connexins could be regulated by oxygen came from data
on early-onset preeclamptic placentas which revealed an increase in Cx43
and a decrease in Cx46. To ﬁgure out if hypoxia is responsible for this
change invasive JAr trophoblast cells which express Cxs43, 40 and to
a lesser extent Cx46 were cultivated under different O2 concentrations. In
contrast to Cx40 which is not changed, 1% O2 levels increased Cx43 but
decreased Cx46. Interestingly, upon hypoxia the localisation of Cx43
shifted from the cell membrane to the cytoplasm. This internalization was
dependent on HIF-2a but not on HIF-1a. In contrast Cx46 protein translocated from nucleus adjacent areas to the cell membrane independent
from HIF-1a but dependent from HIF-2a stabilization. Both hypoxia
mediated translocations of the Cxs were reversible after reoxygenation.
Though Cx46 shifted to the cell membrane cell coupling properties analysed by calcein transfer using ﬂow cytometry showed a signiﬁcant
decrease in cell coupling under hypoxia which indicate the dominant
function of Cx43. Thus though Cx43 expression levels in JAr cells upon
hypoxia were upregulated cell coupling via connexin channels were
decreased due to the translocation of Cx43 to the cytoplasm.
Conclusion: To summarize, this study showed that placental connexins
Cx43 and Cx46 are hypoxia-regulated and are associated with loss in
function which could contribute to the pathomechanisms observed in
preeclampsia.

Carlos Escudero1, Sebastian San Martin2, Claudia Cabezas3, Pedro
Saldana3,4, Patricio Bertoglia3,4, Cristian Celis1, Jesenia Acurio1
1
Vascular Physiology Laboratory, Department of Basic Sciences, Universidad del Bio Bio, Chillan, Bio Bio Region, Chile, 2Biomedical Research
Centre, Universidad del Valparaiso, Valparaiso, Valparaiso Region, Chile,
3
Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Catolica de la Santisima Concepcion,
Concepcion, Bio Bio Region, Chile, 4Herminda Martin Clinical Hosptila,
Chillan, Bio Bio Region, Chile
Background: Early-onset pre-eclampsia rather than late-onset preeclampsia is commonly associated to high rate of adverse perinatal
outcomes. Despite some controversies, causes have been associated with
reduced feto-placental blood ﬂow, related to placental vascular alteration
such as infarct, calciﬁcation, ischemia, and reduced angiogenesis. These
controversies could be associated with clinical parameters and methodological issues during placental histological analysis.
Aim: Investigate whether alteration in morphometric and histological
analysis of placental vessels are related to pre-eclampsia onset in samples
immunostained with CD31.
Methods: Placental samples from normal pregnant women (n¼15), lateonset (n¼5), and early-onset pre-eclampsia ( 34 weeks, n¼6) were
obtained after Ethical Committee approbation. In each case, the entire
clinical records were reviewed. Placentas were weighted and major and
minor diameters were measured. Placental area was calculated considering an elliptical form. Full-depth columns of placental tissue were ﬁxed
in paraformaldehyde (4%) in phosphate buffer solution and maintained in
parafﬁn. A histopathologist analyzed the slices of placental tissue stained
by hematoxiline and eosine in a blind manner. Density of throphoblast
nods, ﬁbrin deposit, ﬁbrosis, and calciﬁcation per visual camp were estimated. Morphometric analysis was performed in samples immunostained
with CD31. Ten photos were taken for each sample in a randomized form
and analyzed in a blind manner. Villus and vessel number, diameters and
areas, as well as CD31 expression were analyzed digitally.
Results: Maternal demographic characteristics were similar in all studied
women. According with clinical criteria gestation age (34  1.4 weeks) was
lower in early-onset pre-eclampsia compared to normal pregnancy (39 
0.3 weeks) or late-onset (38  0.5 weeks). Early-onset was characterized
reduced newborn weight and height, placental weight and area compared
with normal pregnancy or late onset (P<0.05). There were not statistical
differences in histological signs of ﬁbrosis, ﬁbrin deposits or calciﬁcation
among the groups. Early (16  2) and late-onset (18  3) showed an
increased number of vessels per visual camp, mainly located in terminal
villi, compared to normal pregnancy (10  2). Area of intermedia and
terminal villi was higher in early-onset, as the area of vessels was in lateonset, compared to normal pregnancy. Accordingly, vessel density
(area villi/area vessels) in terminal villi was increased in late-onset but not
in early onset compared to normal pregnancy, a phenomenon associated
to reduction of diffusion distance in late onset compared to normal or early
onset pre-eclampsia (see ﬁgure). Digital and visual analysis showed a weak
intensity of CD31 stained in all samples from early or late onset compared
normal pregnancy (P<0.05).
Conclusion: early-onset pre-eclampsia is associated to structural changes
in vessels and placental villi formation complicating substances interchange between mother and fetus. Whereas in late-onset pre-eclampsia
a compensatory mechanism characterized by increased vessel formation
located close to the diffusion area may ensure nutrient uptake toward the
fetus under this maternal hypertensive disorder. Supported by FONDECYT
1100684, Conicyt Anillo ACT73.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A87

P2.17

P2.18

ACTIVATION OF TLR3 IN THE TROPHOBLAST IS ASSOCIATED
WITH CHANGED EXPRESSION OF ANGIOGENIC FACTORS

CALCIUM SUPPLEMENTATION PREVENTS ENDOTHELIAL CELL
ACTIVATION: POSSIBLE RELEVANCE TO PREECLAMPSIA

Wu Ying, Wang Bo, Chen Danqing, He Jing, Huang Hefeng
Women’s Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, China

Qi Chen1, Mancy Tong1, Man Wu2, Peter Stone1, Saul Snowise1, Larry
Chamley1
1
The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, 22 Wuxi Maternity
and Child Health Hospital, Wuxi, China

Objectives: Imbalance between pro-angiogenic (i.e., placental growth
factor (PlGF)) and anti-angiogenic factors (i.e., soluble VEGF receptor-1
(sVEGFR-1, also referred to as sFlt1) and Endoglin) is involved in the
pathophysiology of preeclampsia. Toll like receptor 3 (TLR3) is a receptor
which recognizes viral double stranded RNA and triggers immune reactions upon viral infection. It has been shown that trophobalsts express
TLR3, and TLR3 ligation results in productions of sFlt-1 in trophoblast cell
line HTR8. In the present study, we showed that the expression of angiogenic factors is affected by TLR3 ligation in primary trophoblasts.
Methods: Under informed consents, human villi samples were obtained
from cases of induced abortion in the ﬁrst trimester. Trophoblasts were
isolated and cultured. Swan 71, a ﬁrst trimester trophoblast cell line was
also used. Cells were stimulated with PIC (TLR3 speciﬁc ligand). sFlt-1,
Endoglin, and PlGF mRNA and protein expression were evaluated by real
time PCR and ELISA respectively.
Results: PIC (10 ug/ml) signiﬁcantly induced sFlt-1, while suppressed PlGF
expression in mRNA level in a time- dependent manner, which reached the
highest effect 2 hs after stimulation (P < 0.01). The statistically signiﬁcant
difference disappeared 6 hs after stimulation. However, Endoglin mRNA
was signiﬁcantly suppressed 6 hr (up to 24 hr) after PIC stimulation.
Concentration of sFlt-1 in the conditioned media of Swan cell line 24 hs up
to 120hs after PIC stimulation was signiﬁcantly higher than non-treatment
control.
Conclusion: This study showed that anti-angiogenic sFlt-1 is induced,
while pro-angiogenesis factor, PlGF is inhibited by TLR3 ligation in
trophoblasts shortly after stimulation. Disturbance of angiogenesis factors
during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy upon viral infections may be
involved in the pathophysiology of preeclampsia.

Objectives: The deportation of trophoblast debris from the placenta has
been hypothesised that deportation of necrotic trophoblast debris may
contribute to maternal endothelial cell activation in preeclampsia. We
have previously shown that IL-6 results in shedding of more necrotic
trophoblast debris and that this debris when phagocytosed by endothelial
cells results in activation of the endothelial cells. A number of studies
suggest calcium supplementation may reduce the risk of developing
preeclampsia by up to 50% but the protective mechanism of calcium
supplementation is unclear. The aim of this study was to investigate
whether calcium supplementation affects either the production of necrotic
trophoblast debris from the placenta or inﬂuences endothelial cell
activation.
Methods: First trimester placental explants were cultured with IL-6 in the
presence or absence of calcium (CaCl2) for 24hours. Trophoblastic debris
was collected from the explants and then exposed to monolayers of
endothelial cell for 24hours. In other experiments, endothelial cells were
treated with IL-6 or necrotic trophoblastic debris in the presence of
increasing concentrations of CaCl2, ranging from 230 to 700mg/mL, or
endothelial cells were treated with low concentration of CaCl2, ranging
from 0 to 230mg/mL, for 24hours. Endothelial cell activation was measured
by quantifying cell-surface ICAM-1 levels by ELISA.
Results:

1) Increasing the concentration of CaCl2 in the medium of
placental explants treated with IL-6 did not signiﬁcantly reduce
the activation of endothelial cells induced by phagocytosis of
the trophoblasts debris from these explants (p>0.05).
2) Increasing the concentration of CaCl2 in the medium of endothelial cells treated with either IL-6 or necrotic trophoblastic
debris signiﬁcantly reversed the activating effects of IL-6 and
necrotic trophoblast debris in a dose dependent fashion.
3) Reducing the amount of CaCl2 in the culture of untreated
endothelial cells caused a signiﬁcant increase in endothelial
cell activation as measured by ICAM-1 levels.
Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that calcium levels are important to
endothelial cell activation and supplemental calcium may reverse the
activation of the endothelium induced by proinﬂammatory mediators or
necrotic trophoblastic debris. These results may in part help to explain the
beneﬁts of calcium supplementation in the reduction of risk for developing
preeclampsia.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A88

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.19

P2.20

EXPRESSION LEVEL OF THE RECEPTOR FOR ADVANCED
GLYCATED END PRODUCTS (RAGE) IN THE
SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST CORRELATES WITH THE SEVERITY OF
PRE-ECLAMPSIA AS DEMONSTRATED BY A NOVEL METHOD
FOR AUTOMATED IN-SITU QUANTIFICATION OF PROTEINS

HTRA3 AS AN EARLY MARKER FOR PREECLAMPSIA:
SPECIFIC MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES AND SENSITIVE
HIGH-THROUGHPUT ASSAYS FOR SERUM SCREENING

Andreas Heindl1,4, Sabine Dekan2, Radu Rogojanu1,3, Rupert Ecker3,
Giovanna Bises1, Theresia Thalhammer1, Hana Uhrova1, Alexander K. Seewald4, Isabella Ellinger1
1
Dept. of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research, Medical University
Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 2Dept. of Clinical Pathology. Medical University
Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3TissueGnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 4Seewald
Solutions, Vienna, Austria
Objectives: The receptor for advanced glycated end-products (RAGE)
contributes to tissue damage in many inﬂammatory diseases. Ligand-RAGE
interaction activates a cell response that promotes inﬂammation. Preeclampsia (PE) is characterized by systemic inﬂammation. Available data
suggest up-regulation of placental RAGE during PE and consequently
involvement of the ligand-RAGE axis in the promotion of inﬂammation in
PE. However, human-based approaches to quantify placental proteinexpression remain semi-quantitative and prone to inter-observer differences. Tissue-Cytometry combines microscopic analysis of tissues with fast
and reproducible computation of tissue-associated parameters. Automated image segmentation is essential for computer-based tissue evaluation, but often operates by cell identiﬁcation via their nucleus preventing
analysis of multinuclear or a-nuclear tissue elements, e.g. erythrocytes. To
enable automated in-situ analysis of placental RAGE expression in health
and PE, we developed and validated algorithms able to segment the
multinuclear syncytiotrophoblast (STB) in the complex shaped placental
villi.
Methods: Parafﬁn-sections of chorionic tissue from PE (n¼14) and control
(n¼13) placentas were labeled with target-speciﬁc primary and ﬂuorescent secondary antibodies. A composite image consisting of 81frames/
placenta was acquired and digitalized with a software-driven motorized
epiﬂuorescence microscope (TissueGnostics GmbH). Automated identiﬁcation of STB area by cytokeratin-7-expression or of auto-ﬂuorescent
erythrocytes by their shape was done combining classical digital imageprocessing and pattern recognition approaches with machine-learning
techniques.
Results: The developed algorithms identiﬁed STB areas as well as erythrocytes in-situ as good as human experts. RAGE expression was quantiﬁed
after in-silico subtraction of background ﬂuorescence caused by erythrocytes. A positive correlation between RAGE-expression in the STB and
severity of PE was demonstrated showing 2.5-fold increase of RAGE in
severe cases of PE.
Conclusion: We established a novel approach for fast and reproducible
automated analysis of immunoﬂuorescent-labeled placental chorionic
tissue, and demonstrated correlation of RAGE expression levels with
severity of PE.

Kemperly Dynon, Sophea Heng, Ying Li, Harmeet Singh, Kelly Walton,
Guiying Nie
Prince Henry’s Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Vic, Australia
Objectives: Mammalian HtrA3 (high temperature requirement A3) is
a serine protease of the HtrA family. It has two isoforms [long (HtrA3-L)
and short (HtrA3-S)] and is important for placental development and
cancer progression. Recently, HtrA3 was identiﬁed as a potential diagnostic
marker for early detection (13-14 weeks gestation) of preeclampsia.
However, there are no high-throughput assays available to detect HtrA3 in
human serum. The aim of this study was to generate HtrA3 monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) and high-throughput assays.
Methods: HtrA3 mAbs were generated in mice against recombinant
human HtrA3-L protein and a synthetic peptide. The clonal mAbs were
epitope-mapped and validated on recombinant and endogenous HtrA3 by
cell transfection, Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry. Ampliﬁed
luminescent proximity homogeneous assays-linked immunosorbent
assays (AlphaLISAs), were developed to detect HtrA3 isoforms in serum.
Whether these mAbs could modulate (inhibit/stimulate) the proteolytic
activity of HtrA3 was also tested.
Results: We cloned ﬁve HtrA3 mAbs, three recognised both HtrA3-L and
HtrA3-S and the other two detected HtrA3-L only. All ﬁve mAbs were
highly speciﬁc to HtrA3 and applicable in western blotting and immunohistochemical analysis of endogenous HtrA3 proteins in the mouse and
human tissues. The newly developed HtrA3 AlphaLISAs detected HtrA3
protein isoforms in picomolar levels in human serum. Importantly, the
HtrA3 AlphaLISA detected signiﬁcantly higher serum levels of HtrA3 in
women at 13-14 weeks of gestation who subsequently developed
preeclampsia compared to gestation-matched controls. In addition, two of
the mAbs modulated HtrA3 activity, one inhibiting and the other
stimulating.
Conclusion: We produced a panel of highly speciﬁc mAbs recognizing
different HtrA3 isoforms. These mAbs are valuable for the development of
various immunoassays and characterisation of HtrA3 isoform-speciﬁc
biology. The newly developed HtrA3 AlphaLISA assays are suitable for
large scale screening of human serum. These mAbs also provide invaluable
tools to modulate HtrA3 action.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.21

P2.22

PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF THE MORE PREPARD STUDY
(MICROPARTICLE ORIENTATED RISK EVALUATION IN THE
PREDICTION OF PREECLAMPSIA AMONG RISK GRAVIDAS):
A MULTICENTER PROSPECTIVE PROGNOSTIC MARKER STUDY

PRO-COAGULANT CAPACITY OF SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLASTIC
MICROPARTICLES (STBMS)

Justine Sayuri Fitzgerald1, Claudia Göhner1, Udo Markert1, Tanja Groten2,
Maik Sossdorf3, Wolfgang Lösche3, Ekkehard Schleußner2
1
Placenta-Lab/ Obstetrics Department, University Hospital Jena, Jena,
Thuringia, Germany, 2Obstetrics Department, University Hospital Jena,
Jena, Thuringia, Germany, 3Center for Sepsis Control and Care, University
Hospital Jena, Jena, Thuringia, Germany
Introduction: Preeclampsia (PE) is a potentially dangerous pregnancy
pathology contributing to higher worldwide mortality and morbidity. The
negative inﬂuence of syncytiotrophoblastic microparticles (STBMs) on the
placenta and maternal endothelia is thought to play a key role in generating the inﬂammatory effects that lead to PE symptoms. Doppler sonography of the uterine arteries assists in identifying a risk population,
however, the positive predictive value for this method is low.
Aim of this study is to evaluate whether STBMs can serve as an accessory
marker to conventional Doppler sonography to better identify pregnant
women who will actually develop PE.
Methods: Pregnant women between 19-21 gestational weeks (GW) with
abnormal uterine perfusion were enrolled into this prospective study.
Plasma samples were taken at inclusion (baseline) and at two further visits
at 8 week intervals to follow STBM concentration alterations during
pregnancy. The primary endpoint assessed is PE and/or hemolysis,
elevated liver, low platelets (HELLP) syndrome. Other PE-associated
pathologies (intrauterine growth retardation [IUGR], intrauterine fetal
demise [IUFD], placental abruption, premature delivery) constitute the
secondary endpoints. Maternal STBM concentrations were measured using
a homemade Enzyme Linked Sorbent Assay (ELSA) which speciﬁcally
measures STBMs. The receiver operating characteristics (ROC) for baseline
measures are graphically displayed and area under curve (AUC) is
estimated including 95% conﬁdence levels.
Results: Of the 73 women included in the study, 16 developed PE (cases)
and 56 did not (control). After analyses of mid-gestational probes, the ROC
curve was in close proximity to the line of no-discrimination.
Conclusion: Our preliminary results indicate that the maternal STBM
concentration at mid-gestation does not predict the development of PE or
associated pregnancy pathologies. Further analysis is underway to assess
whether STBM measurements at later gestational time points can predict
PE shortly before onset of disease.

A89

Claudia Göhner1, Andreas Brückmann2, Ekkehard Schleußner2, Udo
Markert1, Maik Sossdorf3, Dionne S. Tannetta4, Justine Sayuri Fitzgerald1
1
Placenta-Lab/ Obstetrics Department, University Hospital Jena, Jena,
Thuringia, Germany, 2Obstetrics Department, University Hospital Jena,
Jena, Thuringia, Germany, 3Center for Sepsis Control and Care, University
Hospital Jena, Jena, Thuringia, Germany, 4Nufﬁeld Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital,
Oxford, UK
Introduction: A characteristic of the severe pregnancy pathology,
preeclampsia (PE), is endothelial dysfunction as seen through vasoconstriction and platelet activation. The release of syncytiotrophoblastic
microparticles (STBM) is associated especially with severe, as opposed to
mild, forms of PE. Classic STBM research has been geared to investigating
their effects on the endothelial compartment, however, their thrombogenic potential is not well characterized.
Aim of the study was to investigate the pro-coagulant activity of STBMs.
Methods: STBMs were derived from placenta perfusates and, after staining
with FITC-labeled annexin-V that binds to negatively charged phospholipids, quantiﬁed by ﬂowcytometry. Pro-coagulant activity was determined on immobilized STBMs as prothrombinase activity in a plasma-free
system or as the velocity of ﬁbrin formation after addition of STBMs to
normal plasma. ADP-induced aggregation of blood platelets in plateletrich plasma (PRP) was measured in absence and presence of STBMs
using PAP-4 aggregometer (mölab GmbH, Hilden).
Results: STBMs expose negatively charged phospholipids at their surface
which can be used for ﬂowcytometric quantiﬁcation. Due to these phospholipids, STBMs exert a signiﬁcant pro-coagulant activity indicated by
their prothrombinase activity as well as by the accelerated ﬁbrin formation. STBMs also signiﬁcantly increase the rate of ADP-induces platelet
aggregation.
Conclusion: STBMs have a pro-coagulant activity as well as a stimulating
effect on platelet aggregation. Both effects may contribute the impaired
microcirculation in PE. The prothrombotic effects of STBMs are at least
partially related to the exposure of negatively charged phospholipids.
However, also other factors such as exposure of tissue factor and receptors
for interaction with platelets may contribute. Further research is underway
to validate this hypothesis.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A90

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.23

P2.24

A STUDY ON THE ASSOCIATION OF SFLT-1 WITH PLACENTAL
OXIDATIVE STRESS AND PLACENTAL APOPTOSIS IN
PREECLAMPSIA

PLACENTAL GLUCOSE TRANSPORTER (GLUT)-1 EXPRESSION
IN PREECLAMPSIA

Betsy Varughese, Neerja Rani, Kalpana Luthra, Neerja Bhatla, A K Dinda,
Renu Dhingra
All India Institute of Medical Science, New Delhi, India
Introduction: Preeclampsia is a multi-systemic hypertensive disorder,
characterized by new-onset of hypertension and proteinuria after 20
weeks of gestation. It occurs only in the presence of a placenta and is
characterized by abnormal trophoblast invasion of the spiral arteries
leading to placental ischemia. The hypoxic placenta may then induce the
production of a circulating toxin sFlt-1 that functions as a decoy receptor
during placental development and prevents the binding of pro-angiogenic
factor (VEGF & PlGF) to its signaling receptor (VEGFR-1) leading to endothelial dysfunction. This may also lead to an exaggerated state of oxidative
stress in the placenta which in turn may stimulate increased placental
apoptosis. The linkage between the generation of circulating sFlt-1 and the
placental oxidative stress and apoptosis remains unidentiﬁed.
Objectives: Therefore we aimed to study the association of circulating
sFlt-1 with placental oxidative stress and apoptosis in preeclamptic
patients.
Methods: 40 preeclamptic patients and 40 control pregnant women were
selected and followed till their delivery. Blood samples were collected at
the time of diagnosis and placentas were collected after the delivery. The
serum levels of sFlt-1 were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) and the placental oxidative stress markers like MDA, GSH
and SOD were estimated by biochemical estimation. The placental
apoptosis was also studied by immunohistochemistry of various apoptotic
markers like Bcl2, Bax, Fas, Fas L, M30 and TUNEL technique.
Results: The serum levels of sFlt-1 were signiﬁcantly higher in
preeclamptic women compared to the control. The levels of MDA were
signiﬁcantly higher and the levels of GSH and SOD were signiﬁcantly lower
in the placentas of preeclamptic patients as compared to the control group.
This altered levels of oxidative stress markers proved that oxidative stress
was signiﬁcantly increased in preeclamptic placentas as compared to the
control. The apoptotic index was signiﬁcantly higher in preeclamptic
placentas as compared to the control by various apoptotic markers. This
also proved that apoptosis was signiﬁcantly increased in placentas of
preeclamptic patients as compared to the control.
Conclusion: Therefore it is concluded that higher levels of serum sFlt-1
may have an association with increased placental oxidative stress and
placental apoptosis in preeclampsia.

Benjamin P. Lüscher1, Marianne Messerli1, Daniel V. Surbek1, Ruth Sager1,
Christiane Albrecht2, Matthias A. Hediger2, Marc U. Baumann1
1
University Women’s Hospital, Inselspital, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland, 2Inst. of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Bern,
Switzerland
Objectives: Preeclampsia, a pregnancy-speciﬁc disease affecting up to 5%
of all pregnancies worldwide, is a major cause of maternal and perinatal
morbidity and mortality. Materno-fetal glucose transport is crucial for the
fetal well-being since there is no de novo glucose synthesis in the fetus.
Previously we have shown that placental glucose transporter (GLUT)-1 is
up-regulated upon hypoxia. Preeclampsia is associated with hypoxia as
well as intrauterine growth restriction. The aim of this study was to
investigate placental (GLUT-1) expression in preeclampsia.
Methods: Placentae were obtained after elective caesarean sections
following normal pregnancies (controls) and pregnancies complicated by
preeclampsia. Syncytial basal membrane (BM) and apical microvillousmembrane (MVM) fractions were prepared using differential ultracentrifugation and magnesium precipitation. Protein expression was
assessed by Western blot analysis of syncytial BM and MVM fractions.
Results: In both preeclampsia and controls (GLUT)-1 protein expressions
were signiﬁcantly lower in BM than in MVM. In preeclampsia, (GLUT)-1
expression was signiﬁcantly reduced in MVM but not altered in BM fractions when compared to controls.
Conclusions: (GLUT)-1 is asymmetrically expressed on syncytial basal and
apical membranes of placentae following normal pregnancies and pregnancies compromised by preeclampsia. Compared to controls, the (GLUT)1 protein expression pattern is substantially changed in preeclampsia. This
altered (GLUT)-1 expression might have an impact on materno-fetal
glucose transport, which in turn impairs fetal growth and development.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A91

P2.25

P2.26

IDENTIFICATION OF PREGNANCY-ASSOCIATED MICRORNAS
AND THEIR CIRCULATING LEVELS IN PLASMA FROM NORMAL
PREGNANT WOMEN AND PRE-ECLAMPTIC WOMEN

THE LIPID TRANSPORTERS ABCA1 AND ABCG1 ARE
DIFFERENTIALLY EXPRESSED IN SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLASTS
OF PREECLAMPTIC AND IUGR PLACENTAS

Kiyonori Miura1, Ai Higashijima1, Shoko Miura1, Yuri Hasegawa1, kentaro
Yamasaki1, Ozora Jo1, Shuhei Abe1, Kohichiro Yoshiura2, Hideaki Masuzaki1
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagasaki University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan, 2Department of Human
Genetics, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Nagasaki, Japan

Meike Körner1, Fabian Wenger2, Liudmila Nikitina2,3, Marc Baumann4,3,
Daniel Surbek4,3, Christiane Albrecht2,3
1
Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 2Institute of
Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland, 3Swiss National Center of Competence in Research, NCCRTransCure, Bern, Switzerland, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland

Background: Recently, some of placental microRNAs (miRNA) were
reported as pregnancy-associated molecules. However, the understanding
of these novel molecules is still limited. In this study, we investigated the
clinical signiﬁcance of pregnancy-associated microRNAs in pre-eclampsia.
Methods: By microarray-based screening of 723 human microRNAs, we
selected placenta-predominantly expressed microRNAs that exhibited
signal intensities >100 times higher in placental tissues than in corresponding whole blood samples. Subsequently, by quantitative real-time
RT-PCR, microRNAs that were predominantly expressed in the placenta
and that showed signiﬁcantly decreased levels in maternal plasma after
delivery were identiﬁed as pregnancy-associated microRNAs. Association
between the circulating levels of pregnancy-associated miRNA and the
presence of pre-eclampsia was investigated.
Results: Eighty-two placenta-predominantly expressed microRNAs were
selected and 24 out of them were identiﬁed as pregnancy-associated
microRNAs. These included 16 microRNAs (66.7%; 16/24) clustered on
19q.13.42. The chromosome 19 miRNA cluster (C19MC) at 19q31.42 is
speciﬁcally expressed in the placenta. As cell-free pregnancy-related
miRNA markers, has-miR-515-3p and hsa-miR-519b-3p were selected
from 3’ and 5’ region of C19MC. The plasma concentrations of CF C19MCderived microRNAs (has-miR-515-3p and has-miR-519b-3p) increased
signiﬁcantly in plasma from pre-eclampsia than in that from normal
pregnancy (Mann-Whitney’s U test, P¼0.0274 and 0.0019, respectively).
Conclusion: Most of pregnancy-associated microRNAs were clustered on
19q13.42, which are critical regions for placental development. Pregnancyassociated microRNAs may be useful molecular markers for monitoring the
presence of pre-eclampsia.

Objectives: The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter A1 (ABCA1) and
ABCG1 are highly expressed in the placenta in various compartments,
including the villous syncytiotrophoblast (V-STB) and foetal endothelial
cells. Among other not yet characterized functions, they play a role in the
foeto-maternal transport of cholesterol and other lipophilic molecules. In
humans, preliminary data suggest expressional changes of ABCA1 and
ABCG1 in pathologic gestation, particularly under hypoxic conditions, but
a systematic expression analysis in common human pregnancy diseases
has never been performed. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to
characterize ABCA1 and ABCG1 expression in a large series of pathologic
placentas, in particular from preeclampsia (PE) and intrauterine growth
restriction (IUGR) which are associated with placental hypoxia.
Methods: Placentas from 152 pathological pregnancies, including PE
and/or HELLP (n¼24) and IUGR (n¼21), and 20 normal control placentas
were assessed for their ABCA1 and ABCG1 mRNA and protein expression
with quantitative RT-PCR and semi-quantitative immunohistochemical
analysis, respectively.
Results: ABCA1 protein expression in the V-STB was signiﬁcantly less
extensive in PE compared with normal controls (<10% of V-STB stained for
ABCA1 in 58% PE placentas vs. 25% controls; p¼0.035). Conversely, it was
signiﬁcantly more widespread in IUGR (>75% of V-STB stained in 57% IUGR
placentas vs. 15% controls; p¼0.009). Moreover, there was an insigniﬁcant
trend for increased ABCA1 expression in fetal endothelial cells of stem villi
in PE (p¼0.0588). ABCA1 staining levels in V-STB were signiﬁcantly associated with placental histopathological features related with hypoxia: they
were decreased in placentas exhibiting syncytial knotting (p¼0.033) and
decidual vasculopathy (p¼0.0437) and increased in low weight placentas
(p¼0.015). The signiﬁcant and speciﬁc alterations in ABCA1 protein
expression found at a speciﬁc cellular level were not paralleled by changes
in ABCA1 mRNA abundance of total placental tissue. ABCG1 staining was
universally extensive in the V-STB of normal placentas, always affecting
more than 90% of V-STB surface. In comparison, ABCG1 staining of the
V-STB was generally often reduced in pregnancy diseases. In particular,
less than 90% of V-STB exhibited ABCG1 staining in 26% of PE placentas
(p¼0.022) and 35% of IUGR placentas (p¼0.003). Similarly to ABCA1,
ABCG1 mRNA expression in total placental tissue was not signiﬁcantly
different between controls and PE or IUGR.
Conclusion: ABCA1 and ABCG1 proteins are differentially expressed, with
either down- or up-regulation, in the V-STB of placentas exhibiting
features of chronic hypoxia, such as in PE and IUGR. This suggests that
other factors in addition to hypoxia regulate the expression of placental
lipid transporters. The speciﬁc changes on a cellular level were masked
when only total tissue mRNA was analysed underlining the importance of
cell speciﬁc expression analysis. The potential effects of decreased
placental ABCA1 and ABCG1 expression on foetal nutrition and development remain to be elucidated.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A92

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.27

P2.28

ASSOCIATION BETWEEN CARDIOTOCOGRAPH (CTG)
MONITORING AND UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD ANALYSIS
AT PARTURITION

HYPOXIA INDUCIBLE FACTOR-1 (HIF-1)-DIRECTED DIVERSION
OF CARBON FLUX IN MURINE TROPHOBLAST CELLS

Satomi Tanaka, Shintaro Makino, Toshiyuki Okumura, Ritsuko Yashiro,
Tomomi Saito, Takashi Yorifuji, Yuka Yamamoto, Motoi Sugimura, Satoru
Takeda
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Juntendo University School of
Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: Cardiotocograph (CTG) monitoring is useful to predict a fetal
hypoxic stress during parturition. However, the diagnosis of neonatal
hypoxia is not always easy only through CTG. The aim was to evaluate the
association between CTG level and umbilical blood pH and leaking
enzymes.
Methods: 101 term births at Juntendo hospital, Tokyo (from October 2011
to January 2012) were analysed on Apgar score, mode of delivery, umbilical
blood pH and leaking enzymes (AST, LDH, CK, NSE) by CTG level based on
the guideline 2009 of Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology (JSOG).
The pregnancies with maternal complication, chorioamnionitis and
preterm birth were excluded.
Results: Apgar score (1 minute) of CTG level 4 was worse signiﬁcantly than
that of level 1 (p<0.05). With the deterioration of CTG level, umbilical
blood pH declined with no signiﬁcance (p¼0.06). However, umbilical
blood base excess (BE) signiﬁcantly declined with the deterioration of CTG
level (p<0.05). Moreover, umbilical blood AST signiﬁcantly increased with
the deterioration of CTG level (p<0.05). There were no signiﬁcant differences in the other leaking enzymes. On mode of delivery, there was no
signiﬁcant differences of CTG level in cesarean section, however CTG level
was signiﬁcantly worse in forceps delivery compared with normal delivery
(p<0.0001).
Conclusion: CTG level was closely related to umbilical blood pH, BE and
leaking enzymes at parturition. These data might be important to consider
the clinical management and justify the use of CTG level and umbilical
blood analysis as an important predictor of neonatal condition.

Nicholas Illsley, Stacy Zamudio
Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, NJ, USA
Objectives: Metabolic reprogramming is a reversible, HIF-1-regulated
process by which cells under hypoxic stress transition into a hypometabolic state characterized by decreased oxidative and increased
glycolytic metabolism. As part of this process it is proposed that HIF-1
increases the expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase-1 (PDK1),
which inhibits conversion of pyruvate to acetylCoA, and lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), which favours conversion of pyruvate to lactate. This
results in the diversion of glucose carbon to lactate rather than to oxidation. In this study we investigated the role of HIF-1 in activating this
response in murine trophoblast cells.
Methods: The murine SM9-1 trophoblast cell line was co-transduced with
lentiviral particles containing a HIF-luciferase reporter and either
shRNAmir for a non-silencing control (NSC) or three different HIF-1a
shRNAmir (HIF1A52, HIF1A59, HIF1A93). The HIF-1 transcriptional
response in cells expressing the shRNAmir was measured via luciferase
activity following incubation with a hypoxia mimetic (dimethyloxalylglycine, DMOG, 0.5 mM; 24 hr). Western blotting for HIF-1a, PDK1 and
LDHA was performed using extracts of NSC- or HIF1A-transduced SM9-1
cells obtained after incubation under normoxic (10% O2) or hypoxic (1% O2)
conditions.
Results: Luciferase activity stimulated by HIF-1 following DMOG treatment was reduced to 0.720.19, 0.670.12 (NS) and 0.040.12 (p< 0.01) of
the NSC control by HIF1A52, HIF1A59 and HIF1A93 respectively (n¼3).
Expression of HIF-1a, PDK1 and LDHA protein was increased 2.000.25,
1.780.23 and 1.580.07 fold (p < 0.05, n¼3) in NSC-transduced cells
exposed to hypoxia however no increase was observed in the HIF1A93transduced cells (1.240.29, 1.250.13, 1.150.14, NS).
Conclusions: HIF1A93 shRNAmir was able to inhibit HIF-1a up-regulation
by DMOG and by 1% O2. HIF1A93 also inhibited the hypoxic up-regulation
of PDK1 and LDHA demonstrating that the hypoxia-stimulated increase in
HIF-1 is responsible for the up-regulation of PDK1 and LDHA in murine
trophoblast. (Supported by NIH HD46982 to NPI).

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.29

P2.30

DOES HYPOXIA ALTER THE PLACENTAL RENIN ANGIOTENSIN
SYSTEM (RAS)?

HYPOXIA INCREASES UROKINASE-TYPE PLASMINOGEN
ACTIVATOR RECEPTOR (UPAR) AND HYPOXIA INDUCED
FACTOR (HIF) -1ALPHA IN EARLY HUMAN EXTRAVILLOUS
TROPHOBLAST

Lesia O Kurlak1, Hiten D Mistry2, Tereza Cindrova-Davies3, Martha C Tissot
van Patot3, Graham J Burton3, Fiona Broughton Pipkin1
1
Division of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, School of Clinical Sciences,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK, 2Division of Women’s Health,
King’s College London, Women’s Health Academic Centre, KHP, London,
UK, 3Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK
Objectives: We have previously shown an increase in the placental
angiotensin type 1 receptor in pre-eclampsia compared to normotensive
women1 hypothesising that this is related to hypoxia during placental
development. To test this, we studied placentae from low and high altitude
locations.
Hypothesis: Placental RAS components will be increased in high altitude
pregnancies.
Methods: Biopsies were collected from term normotensive women at sealevel (Cambridge and London, UK) and high altitude, 3100m (Leadville,
Colorado) immediately after vaginal delivery or elective nonlaboured
Caesarean section and with informed, written consent.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on parafﬁn-embedded serial
sections using antibodies to angiotensinogen (AGT), prorenin, prorenin
receptor (PRR), angiotensin type 1 (AT1R) and type 2 (AT2R) receptors.
Protein expression was semi-quantitatively assessed (H-score) by a blinded observer and compared between groups (Mann Whitney U test).
Results: Expression of prorenin (P ¼ 0.032), PRR (P<0.0001), AT1R
(P ¼ 0.005) and AT2R (P ¼ 0.004) were all signiﬁcantly higher in placentae
from high altitude. Expression of AGT was not different (P>0.5). The ratio
between prorenin and its receptor also rose signiﬁcantly (P ¼ 0.012), while
that between the AT1R and AT2R was unchanged (P>0.6). The type of
delivery did not inﬂuence expression of any of the components of the RAS
(P >0.2 to >0.7).
Conclusion: Placental RAS is activated in high altitude pregnancies which
may be hypoxia-related. The increased ratio of prorenin to its receptor may
have functional effects. Binding of (pro)renin to PRR induces a 4-fold
increase in its efﬁciency to generate angiotensin I (AngI) from AGT2.
Changes in PRR expression, even without changes in AGT expression, can
have a substantial effect on the generation of AngI, and hence AngII,
affecting placental angiogenesis.

A93

Taihei Tsunemi1, Katsuhiko Naruse1, Masayoshi Akasaki2, Toshiyuki Sado1,
Taketoshi Noguchi1, Hidekazu Oi1, Hiroshi Kobayashi1
1
Obstetrics&Gynecology Nara Medical University, Kashihara/Nara, Japan,
2
Akasaki clinic, Sakurai/Nara, Japan
Objectives: Extravillous trophoblast cell (EVT) invasion in early human
pregnancy progresses under low-oxygen environment. The urokinasetype plasminogen activator (uPA) system is regarded to be implicated in
EVT invasion, since uPA binds to its receptor (uPAR) on cell surface has
been clariﬁed where it catalyses the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin.
However, there have been few studies about the inﬂuence of low oxygen
environment on HIF and uPA system of primary trophoblast in early ﬁrst
trimester. In this study, we investigated uPA, uPAR, PAI-1 and HIF-1alpha
secretion by primary EVTs in normal or hypo/ hyperoxia condition, and
examined whether uPA system contribute to the fair placental development in low-oxygen environment.
Methods: Placental samples (5-9 weeks gestation) were obtained from
patients with artiﬁcial abortion after written informed consent. Cytotrophoblast was separated with Percoll-based method and cultured on
MatrigelR for 24 hours to obtain invasive phenotype (EVT like cell).
Caseinase activity in cytotrophoblast was studied by casein in situ
zymography. Expression of uPA, uPAR, PAI-1 and HIF-1alpha protein on
EVT was measured with Western Blot and ELISA. The culture was performed under 20% oxygen, 5%, and 5% that repeated three times of hypoxic
stimulation for one hour (0.1%). All data were shown as a comparison of
20% or 0.1% with 5%.
Results: Stronger caseinase activity was observed under 5% oxygen than
20% oxygen in cytotrophoblast. The production of uPAR, PAI-1 and
HIF-1alpha protein was increased under 0.1% oxygen stimulation and
decreased in 20% oxygen condition.
Conclusion: Hypoxia altered casainase activity of cytotrophoblast and
production of uPAR, PAI-1 and HIF-1alpha by EVT cells in early ﬁrst
trimester of pregnancy. These results indicated that up-regulation of uPAR
by hypoxia may be mediated by HIF increase in early ﬁrst trimester of
human pregnancy. The regulation of uPA system by HIF-1alpha may
contribute to fair trophoblast invasion.

1. Mistry HD et al, (2012) abstract submitted to IFPA Japan 2012
2. Nguyen G et al, (2002 J Clin Invest 109:1417-1427

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A94

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.31

P2.32

EFFECTS OF DIETARY OMEGA-3 FATTY ACIDS ON OXIDATIVE
AND INFLAMMATORY STATUS OF THE RAT PLACENTA

THE EXPRESSION OF THE NUCLEAR FACTOR ERYTHROID
2-RELATED FACTOR 2 (NRF2) IN INVASIVE EXTRAVILLOUS
TROPHOBLAST IN PREECLAMPSIA

Megan Jones, Peter Mark, Brendan Waddell
The University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia
Objectives: Placental oxidative stress and inﬂammation play key roles in
the pathophysiology of placental-related disorders. Protection from
oxidative stress is provided by antioxidant enzymes which inactivate
reactive oxygen species. Omega-3 (n3) polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs)
are proposed to have both anti-inﬂammatory and antioxidant properties.
Here, we tested the hypothesis that dietary n3-PUFA intake reduces the
oxidative and inﬂammatory status of the placenta.
Methods: Pregnant rats consumed a high n3-PUFA (Hn3) or control diet
from day 1 of pregnancy. Fetuses and placentas were collected on days 17
and 22 (term ¼ day 23), and placentas were dissected into junctional (JZ)
and labyrinth (LZ) zones. Placental oxidative status was measured by
F2-isoprostane concentration, and placental gene expression of antioxidant enzymes Cat, Sod2, Txn1, Pxn1, Pxn5 and Gpx3, and of proinﬂammatory mediators Tnfa, IL-6, IL-1b, Cox1 and Cox2 were measured
by qRT-PCR (males only).
Results: Hn3 consumption increased fetal (P<0.05) and placental (P¼0.05)
weights at day 22 (6.2% and 10.6%, respectively). The Hn3 diet decreased
the concentration of F2-isoprostanes in LZ on days 17 (28%; P<0.001) and
22 (8%, P<0.05), and in JZ at day 22 (25%; P<0.05). Hn3 intake increased
placental expression of Cat in LZ at both days (P<0.001), but decreased
Pxn5 in LZ (P<0.05) at day 17, and decreased Cat, Sod2 and Pxn1 in JZ at
day 17 (P<0.05, P<0.001 and P<0.05, respectively). Surprisingly, LZ
expression of IL-6 (2.7-fold, P<0.05) and IL-1b (1.7-fold, P<0.05) were both
increased by Hn3 diet at day 22.
Conclusion: Dietary n3-PUFA supplementation increased fetal and
placental growth, and this effect was associated with reduced placental
oxidative status. The Hn3 diet clearly enhanced LZ expression of Cat,
whereas it reduced JZ expression of Cat and other antioxidant enzymes.
Pro-inﬂammatory cytokine gene expression was increased by the Hn3 diet
at day 22, possibly linked to approaching parturition.

Nisreen Kweider1, Berthold Huppertz2, Christoph Jan Wruck1, Rainer
Beckmann1, Geldimurat Jumakuliev3, Thomas Pufe1, Mamed Kadyrov1
1
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Aachen, Germany, 2Institute of
Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology, Graz, Austria, 3Department of
Pathology, Ashgabat, Turkmenistan
Objectives: Impaired trophoblast invasion into the uteroplacental arteries
is accompanied with an evidence of oxidative stress in the extravillous
trophoblast (EVT) in preeclampsia (PE) complicated with intra-uterine
growth restriction (IUGR).
One of the major cellular defence mechanisms against oxidative stress is
the activation of the Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2).
Recently, we have shown that PE is associated with an increased expression of Nrf2 in villous cytotrophoblast.
Furthermore, we found that VEGF could enhance in vitro the persistence of
BeWo cells under oxidative stress conditions.
In this study the expression of both Nrf2 and VEGF was determined in the
interstitial and intramural extravillous trophoblast in normal pregnancies
and those complicated by early-onset preeclampsia and intra-uterine
growth restriction (IUGR).
Methods: Full-thickness uterine tissues derived from caesarean hysterectomies performed in 6 healthy normotensive women delivering term
infants and from 6 women with severe early-onset preeclampsia and IUGR
(29-34 week’s gestation). The interstitial and intramural EVT were studied
by immunohistochemical analysis of parafﬁn sections stained with antiVEGF, VEGFR-1/Flt-1, Nrf2, 4-HNE and cytokeratin-7.
Results: Cases suffering from preeclampsia with IUGR were characterised
by reduced invasion of EVT into uteroplacental arteries in the endometrial
and myometrial segments. In addition, these cells showed an increased
expression of Nrf2 in the pathological sections. The increased expression of
Nrf2 in cases of PE/IUGR was associated with decreased expression of
VEGFR-1/Flt-1 in these cells compared to controls.
Conclusion: Our data suggests that besides villous cytotrophoblast, also
the EVT is a source of Nrf2-dependent genes. VEGF deﬁciency may cause
higher oxidative stress in extravillous trophoblast in cases with
preeclampsia and IUGR. The resulting reduced basal defence against
oxidative stress and the higher vulnerability to oxidative damage may play
a role in the limited trophoblast invasion into spiral arteries in cases
suffering from early-onset preeclampsia and IUGR.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A95

P2.33

P2.34

SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLASTIC TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVITY AND
OXIDATIVE STRESS IN COMPLICATIONS OF PREGNANCY

UTEROPLACENTAL CIRCULATION AND MATERNAL ABDOMINAL
AORTIC STIFFNESS IN NORMAL AND COMPROMISED
PREGNANCY

Norah Fogarty1,2, Anne Ferguson-Smith1,2, Graham Burton1,2
Dept. Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, 2Centre for Trophoblast Research, Cambridge, UK
1

Objectives: It has been shown that a proportion of nuclei in the syncytiotrophoblast of the normal human placenta are transcriptionally active at
all stages of gestation (Fogarty et al 2011). It is currently unknown what
stimulus renders nuclei inactive. We investigated transcriptional activity
and oxidative DNA damage in the syncytiotrophoblast in cases of preeclampsia, with and without IUGR (PE, IUGR and PEþIUGR). These ﬁndings are correlated with an ex vivo model of induced oxidative stress.
Methods: Parafﬁn-embedded sections from placentas of PE, IUGR and
PEþIUGR and gestational age-matched controls were selected (n¼5, 30
weeks). RNA Pol II and 8-oxo-2’deoxyguanosine (8OHdG) were selected as
markers of transcriptional activity and oxidative DNA damage. Immunohistochemistry was performed and proportions of active and damaged
nuclei were calculated.
Villous explants from term Caesarean-delivered placentas were cultured in
H2O2 (n¼5, 0mM and 1000mM). Proportions of RNA Pol II and 8OHdGpositive nuclei were calculated at 0, 24 and 48 hr.
Results: IUGR and IUGRþPE had signiﬁcantly reduced proportions of RNA
Pol II-positive nuclei compared to normal (normal 60.7%; IUGR 47.6%,
p¼0.023; PEþIUGR 44.04%, p¼0.012). In contrast, the proportion of nuclei
staining for 8OHdG was signiﬁcantly increased in PE, IUGR and IUGRþPE
compared to normal (normal 39.5%; PE 59.34%, p¼0.006; IUGR 63.08%,
p¼0.003; and PEþIUGR 63.09%, p¼0.002).
In the ex vivo model an increase in 8OHdG staining was observed after
24hr, and a signiﬁcant reduction in RNA Pol II-positive STB nuclei
compared to control after 48hr (0mM 48hr 48.6%; 1000mM 48hr 67%,
p<0.05).
Conclusion: PE, IUGR and IUGRþPE have signiﬁcantly increased oxidative
DNA damage. IUGR and IUGRþPE have signiﬁcantly reduced percentages
of transcriptionally active STB nuclei. In an ex vivo model of induced
oxidative stress, the percentage of transcriptionally active STB nuclei is
reduced. We hypothesise that increased oxidative stress results in
a reduction in the transcriptional status of the syncytium in pathological
pregnancies.
Supported by the Anatomical Society.

MURATA SHIGERU1, MORI AKIRA1, TAKAMICHI HIRATA1, CHIHIRO
THUTHUI1, KONDO AKANE2, TOSHIHIKO KISHIDA3, TOSHIJI NAMIKI3
1
Tokyo City University, Tokyo, Japan, 2Tokai University, Isehara, Japan,
3
Namiki Ladies Clinic, Atsugi, Japan
Objective: to examine the elastic properties of the abdominal aorta (AA) in
pregnant women with uteroplacental insufﬁciency.
Subject: A study of 82 normal pregnant women and 60 compromised
pregnant women who were identiﬁed by uterine artery Doppler ﬂow
waveform systolic/diastolic ratio >95th percentile (increased peripheral
resistance) was carried out to examine the elastic properties of the
maternal abdominal aorta (AA).
Method: An aortic stiffness index (SI) was measured between 18 and 40
weeks at four weekly intervals with a phase-locked loop ultrasound
technique to estimate the aortic systolic and diastolic diameters and their
correlation with blood pressure.
Results: In the normal group, the aortic systolic and diastolic diameters, as
well as the SI, increased with the maternal age. In the compromised group,
aortic diameter and blood pressure were normal, but SI during the early
second trimester was increased. Pregnancy outcome was examined in
relation to the SI. Twenty-two women from the compromised group with
an SI above 95th percentile for their age had a signiﬁcantly higher prevalence of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction in comparison
with women with a normal SI (p<0.001). The aortic SI was signiﬁcantly
higher in severe than in mild pre-eclampsia.
Conclusion: This study has demonstrated that stiffness of the AA is
increased in pregnant women with uteroplacental insufﬁciency and that
a progressive increase of the SI on serial studies is associated with severity
of the pregnancy outcome. Aberrant hemodynamic adaptation in preeclampsia seems to include increased stiffness of the larger artery beside
high resistance in small peripheral arteries.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A96

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.35

P2.36

FIFTEEN CASES OF CHRONIC ABRUPTION-OLIGOHYDRAMNIOS
SEQUENCE (CAOS)

EXPRESSION OF DECORIN AND ASSOCIATED EXTRA CELLULAR
MATRIX (ECM) COMPONENTS DURING PLACENTATION
IN AI AND SCNT PREGNANCIES IN COW

Aya Kobayashi, Yuko Tanizaki, Mika Mizoguchi, Sakiko Nanjo, Madoka
Yamamoto, Michihisa Siro, Toshihide Matuoka, Nami Ota, Rei Kitano,
Yasushi Mabuchi, Chie Yata, Shigetaka Yagi, Masaaki Iwahashi, Sawako
Minami, Kazuhiko Ino
Wakayama Medical University, Wakayamashi, Japan
Objectives: Recently it has been reported that chronic abruption with
oligohydramnios induces premature labor and neonatal chronic lung
disease. Chronic abruption-oligohydramnios sequence was deﬁned by
Elliot in 1998, by the following criteria: (1) clinically signiﬁcant vaginal
bleeding in the absence of placenta previa or other identiﬁable source of
bleeding, (2) amniotic ﬂuid volume initially documented as normal, and(3)
oligohydramnios (amniotic ﬂuid＜ or¼5 cm) eventually developing
without concurrent evidence of ruptured membranes.
Methods: We investigated the perinatal outcome of ﬁfteen cases with
CAOS compared with premature labor without CAOS.
Results: In the past 7 years, there were 30 cases that had been admitted to
our hospital with recurrent vaginal bleeding from early gestational weeks.
In the second trimester, 15 patients had oligohydramnios (CAOS group)
and 15 patients had adequate amount of amniotic ﬂuid (non CAOS group).
In both groups, the ﬁrst vaginal bleeding episode was seen in early
gestational weeks. In the CAOS group, subchorionic hematoma (SCH) was
detected in 12 cases. They had oligohydramnios without evidence of
ruptured membranes. All cases resulted in preterm delivery before 31
weeks of gestation. Pathological analysis showed that chorioamnionitis
(CAM). degenerative necrosis and diffuse chorioamniotic hemosiderosis
were detected in their placentas. In non CAOS group, SCH was also
detected, but amniotic ﬂuid volume was adequate. Neonatal outcome was
good even in patients with CAM in non CAOS group. Neonatal morbidity
was high in patients with severe CAM in CAOS group.
Conclusion: The episode of recurrent vaginal bleeding followed by oligohydramnios is a risk factor for preterm delivery. Severe CAM and long
term intrauterine inﬂammation lead to neonatal poor prognosis such as
chronic lung disease. We need to pay attention to vaginal bleeding during
the ﬁrst trimester as one symptom of CAOS.

Michel Guillomot1, Evelyne Campion1, Audrey Prezelin1, Sabrina Guissant1,
Aurelie Chaulot-Talmon1, Corinne Giraud-Delville1, Fernando Biase1,2,
Chanaka Rabel1,2, Daniel Le Bourhis1, Christophe Richard1, Richard
Wallace1,2, Olivier Sandra1, Isabelle Hue1, Jean-Paul Renard1, Rosane Oliveira1,3, Harris Lewin1,3, Helene Jammes1
1
INRA - Biology of Development and Reproduction, Jouy-en-Josas, France,
2
University of Illinois- Institute for genomics Biology, Urbana-Champaign,
USA, 3University of California -The Genome Center, Davis, USA
Objectives: Based on our previous studies, we assumed that the composition of the extracellular matrix components (ECM) played a role during
placentation and that misexpression of genes of the ECM were involved in
placental pathologies observed in miscarriages of bovine cloned conceptuses. The aim of this study was to compare the expression pattern of
Decorin (DCN), Collagen type1 alpha2 (Col1A2) and Fibronectin 1 (FN1) in
pregnancies obtained by artiﬁcial insemination (AI) and produced by
somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) in cow.
Methods: Endometrial, extra-embryonic and placental tissues were
obtained from bovine AI and SCNT pregnancies from day 18 of gestation to
term. Tissue samples were processed for in situ hybridization (ISH),
immunohistochemistry and RT-qPCR.
Results: In AI endometria, Decorin, Collagen1a2 and Fibronectin1 were
expressed in the caruncular and intercaruncular stroma. In the maternal
part of the placentomes, expression of all three genes decreased during
pregnancy and became barely detectable at term. In the day 18- extraembryonic tissues, FN1 was expressed in the primitive endoderm underlying the trophoblast. Later on during pregnancy, Decorin, Col1A2 and FN1
were expressed in the extra embryonic mesoderm cells, which constitute
the allanto-chorion mesenchyme of the placental villi and the intercotyledonary chorion. In the core of the placental villi, however,
a decreasing gradient of expression was observed from the chorionic plate
to the deep end of the villi. In SCNT placentomes the levels of expression of
Decorin and Col1A2 did not decrease during gestation and remain high at
term.
Conclusion: These observations suggest that the expression of ECM
components is altered in SCNT pregnancies and that these modiﬁcations
might contribute to placental dysfunctions and term complications in
bovine somatic cloned embryos.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A97

P2.37

P2.38

MATERNAL PLATELET RESPONSE TO THROMBIN REGULATES
PLACENTAL DEVELOPMENT AND FETAL GROWTH IN A MURINE
MODEL OF THROMBOPHILIA-ASSOCIATED PREGNANCY LOSS

ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID ANTIBODIES AND DYSREGULATED
CLOTTING FACTORS DIFFERENTIALLY AFFECT VILLOUS
TROPHOBLAST IN FETAL GROWTH RESTRICTION

Jianzhang An, Vidhyalakshmi Arumugam, Michelle Bordas, Rashmi Sood
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA

Rie Kawaguchi1,2, Berthold Huppertz1,2, Taisuke Sato1, Yuki Ito1, Mamiko
Dobashi1, Tomohiro Tanemoto1, Tadao Tanaka1, Aikou Okamoto1
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Jikei University, School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 2Institute of Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria

Objectives: Mechanisms by which thrombophilia alters placental function
are unclear. In our previous work, we combined maternal and fetal
thrombophilia mutations to generate a murine model of placental developmental failure and fetal death (PMID 17438064). We showed that
platelets play a critical role in disease pathology. We examine the mechanism of platelet-mediated fetal loss in this model.
Methods: Breeding experiments were conducted to combine homozygous
Arg504Gln mutation in blood clotting factor V (FVQ/Q) in the mother with
thrombomodulin Glu387Pro mutation in the fetus (ThbdPro/Pro). Pharmacological and genetic tools were used to address the role of thrombinmediated maternal platelet activation and the role of platelet receptors
aIIbb3 and GPVI in fetal loss.
Results: No live ThbdPro/Pro embryos were observed when FVQ/QThbdPro/þ
females were mated to ThbdPro/þ males and analyzed at 12.5 dpc or later. In
contrast, all genotypes were present at normal Mendelian ratio in the
reverse genetic cross. The combination of FVQ/QThbdPro/þ mother and
ThbdPro/Pro embryo resulted in placental developmental failure. Genetic
absence of thrombin receptor Par3 in the mother rescued 50% of all
ThbdPro/Pro embryos. These had smaller placentae and were growth
retarded by 15.5 dpc. Histological analysis of growth retarded placentae
did not reveal evidence of increased thrombosis. In contrast to Par3, when
the mother lacked thrombin receptor Par4 the placental and embryonic
sizes of ThbdPro/Pro embryos were comparable to littermate controls. In
ongoing studies with the genetic absence of aIIb in the mother or pharmacological inhibition of GPVI we observe occasional live ThbdPro/Pro
embryos, but the number of abortions continue to be high. We will present
genetic data and statistical analysis from these studies at the meeting.
Conclusion: Even a small decrease in EC50 of maternal platelet response
to thrombin overcomes placental developmental block, but results in
suboptimal development through mechanisms that are independent of
placental thrombosis.

Objectives: Antiphospholipid antibodies (aPLs) and dysregulated clotting
factors (CF) are known to be associated with pregnancy pathologies
including preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction. Here we investigated
the effect of aPLs and dysregulated CF on the biology of villous trophoblast.
Methods: Placental samples were collected from normal controls
(NC; n¼8, 25-38w) and cases (all with an SGA infant) having aPLs/APS
(APS; n¼10, 25-36w) or dysregulated CF (CF; n¼9, 27-35w). Placentas
were stained for Ki-67 and cytokeratin 7 to identify proliferating villous
cytotrophoblasts. Images were systematically randomly selected and Ki67
positive cytotrophoblasts and ﬁbrin depositions were counted.
Results: There was no signiﬁcant difference regarding gestational age at
delivery, maternal age, and BMI. Fetal weight was signiﬁcantly different
between NC versus APS, and NC versus CF (NC; 2291  833g, APS; 1160 
413g, CF; 1182  516g). In APS compared to CF, placental weight showed
a tendency to be decreased and the ratio of P/F to be increased. The ratio of
Ki-67 positive cytotrophoblasts in NC gradually decreased in accordance
with gestational age, while this was not apparent in APS and CF. The
relative number of Ki-67 positive cells was signiﬁcantly reduced in APL
(12.1  7.1%) and CF (12.7  5.8%) compared to NC (22.6  6.4%). The total
number of cytotrophoblasts was reduced in APS (578  209) compared to
CF (830  258) and NC (780  149). Regarding ﬁbrin deposition, there were
no signiﬁcant differences in total ﬁbrin deposition and intravillous ﬁbrin
deposition. However, perivillous ﬁbrin deposition signiﬁcantly increased
in CF (3.7  1.5%) compared to APS (1.9  1.1%).
Conclusion: We suggest that aPLs downregulate cytotrophoblast proliferation throughout pregnancy, while in the CF group, an increasing
amount of ﬁbrin deposition ﬁnally leads to a decrease in trophoblast
proliferation but does not affect total cell count.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A98

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.39

P2.40

PLACENTAL MESENCHYMAL DYSPLASIA: CLINICAL FEATURES,
HISTOPATHOLOGICAL FINDINGS, AND DIAGNOSIS

EARLY DEXAMETHASONE TREATMENT RESULTS IN
STRUCTURAL ABNORMALITIES IN SHEEP PLACENTOMES

Midori Okajima1, Isao Sakaguchi1, Takashi Ohba1, Ken Higashimoto2,
Hidenobu Soejima2, Masaharu Fukunaga3, Hidetaka Katabuchi1
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Life Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan, 2Department of Surgery, Faculty
of Medicine, Saga University, Saga, Japan, 3Department of Pathology, The
Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan

Thorsten Braun1,2, Karolin Lange1, Loreen Ehrlich1,2, Shaofu Li3,4, Andreas
Plagemann1,2, John Nwenham3,4, John Challis5, Wolfgang Henrich1,2,
Deborah Sloboda6,7
1
Department of Obstetrics, Charité Campus Virchow, Berlin, Germany, 2AG
Perinatal Programming, Charité Campus VirchowAG Perinatal Programming, Berlin, Germany, 3School of Women’s and Infants’ Health, The
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia, 4Women and Infants
Research Foundation of Western Australia, Perth, Australia, 5Department
of Physiology and Obstetrics and Gynecology, Toronto, Canada, 6The Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, and The National Research Centre for
Growth and Development, Auckland, New Zealand, 7Department of
Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Canada

Objectives: Placental mesenchymal dysplasia (PMD) is an unusual condition characterized by an enlarged, hydropic placenta. Its diagnostic criteria
have not been deﬁned. In this study, we investigated the clinical features,
histopathological ﬁndings, and diagnosis of PMD in Japanese women.
Methods: We accumulated twenty-four cases reported or identiﬁed as
PMD-complicating pregnancies between 2000 and 2010 in Japan.
Attending physicians were asked to complete a questionnaire that helped
us gather clinical details for each case and to provide us with parafﬁnembedded placenta specimens. Histopathological ﬁndings and the
P57kip2 immunohistochemistry of these samples were examined.
Results: Of 24 cases, artiﬁcial abortion was performed in 1 because of
a suspected hydatidiform mole. In the subjects, PMD was strongly associated with female infants, small-for-date babies, preterm births, and
increased incidences of intrauterine fetal demise, but not with increased
maternal age or assisted reproductive technology. In 17 of 23 cases,
placental gross weight was greater than meanþ2SD of each gestational
week; the placental/birth weight ratio exceeded the meanþ2SD in 19
cases. Histopathological ﬁndings for the placentas of 12 cases were as
enlarged edematous stem villi, dilated thick-walled chorionic plate vessels
with ﬁbromuscular hyperplasia, and fresh or organized thromboi. These
ﬁndings were consistent with PMD. The immunohistochemistry of
P57kip2 revealed that 9 of 12 cases were stained as PMD patterns, but
other 3 showed the coexistence of both normal and PMD patterns.
Conclusions: PMD is strongly associated with adverse pregnancy
outcomes. Although placentomegary has been reported as a common
feature of PMD, enlarged placentas were not always found because of
premature birth. P57kip2 immunohistochemistry is utilized as a diagnostic
marker of PMD. Further research is required to understand PMD’s clinical
features and to establish its diagnostic criteria.

Objectives: We have shown that maternal dexamethasone (DEX) administration early in gestation resulted in a decrease in fetal weight, crown
rump length and head circumference in female fetuses at 100dG, which
did not persist until term. Presently, we aimed to identify microstructural
changes in placenta tissue that might explain this transient reduction in
birth weight.
Methods: Pregnant ewes carrying singleton female fetuses of known
gestational age were randomized to control (n¼11) or DEX (n¼5) treatment (0.14mg/kg ewe body weight) consisting of four intramuscular
injections at 12-hourly intervals over 48 hours on days of gestation (dG)
40-41. Animals were euthanized 100dG. Major fetal organs were removed,
weighed and collected for use in other studies. Placentomes were
dissected from the uterus, classiﬁed according to their gross morphology
into A, B, C and D-subtypes, weighed and ﬁxed. Placentome subtype as
well as total placental morphometry was performed with a modiﬁed
cycloid grid in cytokeratin and Von Willebrand Factor double stained
sections. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mRNA expression was
quantiﬁed with RT-PCR.
Results: DEX treatment increased B and C placentome weight and
increased fetal and maternal placentome surface area in A, B and C types as
well as total placental surface area compared to controls. DEX did not affect
surface density or the ratio of maternal to fetal surface area. Maternal
vessel density was signiﬁcantly increased in DEX C-types, whereas VEGF
mRNA expression was signiﬁcantly reduced in DEX C-types compared to
controls.
Conclusions: Maternal DEX administration increased placentome surface
area as well as total placental surface area; suggesting a change in the
nutrient and gaseous exchange area between materno-fetal circulations
without changing placental surface density (a marker of the degree of
interdigitation of maternal/ fetal tissue). Further evaluations of placental
vessel diameter and length are needed to understand DEX-induced
changes in placental vascularity.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A99

P2.41

P2.42

PLACENTAL CHARACTERISTICS IN A CASE OF TWIN
ANEMIA-POLYCYTHEMIA SEQUENCE (TAPS)

MORPHOLOGICAL COMPARISON OF PLACENTAL STEM VILLI
ARTERIES BETWEEN TERM AGA AND SGA NEWBORNS

Yumiko Hirooka, Katsunori Ueda, Saiko Urayama, Suguru Nosaka, Mitsuru
Sasaki, Satoshi Urabe, Miho Kodama, Masatoshi Kumagai, Hiroyuki Naito
Hiroshima prefectural hospital, Hiroshima, Japan

Chizuko yaguchi, Naomi Furuta, Toshiyuki Uchida, Kazunao Suzuki,
Kazuhiro Sugihara, Hiroaki Itoh, Naohiro Kanayama
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu City, Japan

Twin anemia–polycythemia sequence (TAPS) is a rare variant of twin–twin
transfusion syndrome (TTTS), which does not show the characteristic twin
oligohydramnios–polyhydramnios sequence. We report a case of TAPS
based on placental ﬁndings.
A 34-year old primiparous woman was diagnosed in a maternity clinic as
having monochorionic–diamniotic (MD) twins at 8 weeks of gestation.
Periodic ultrasonography revealed no abnormal ﬁndings including amniotic ﬂuid volume. At 30 weeks, the patient was referred to a general
hospital because of pleural effusion in one fetus. Two days later, a testicular
hydrocele and ascites were observed in the fetus and the patient was
referred to our hospital, a tertiary care center of Hiroshima city.
There were no intertwin discordancies in amniotic ﬂuid volume, nor in
the fetal weight estimated by ultrasonography. A Doppler ultrasound
measurement of the middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity (MCA–
PSV), which reﬂects fetal anemia or polycythemia, was within normal
range in both fetuses. At birth by Cesarian section, the fetus with hydrops
was pale and weighed 1,644 g; the other twin was plethoric and weighed
1,754 g. Their hemoglobin concentrations were 4.1 mg/dL and 24.5 mg/dL,
respectively. Three ﬁndings were noted in the placenta. First, the maternal
side was pale in the area corresponding to the anemic fetus and congested
in that relating to the polycythemic fetus; second, there was intense
vascularization on the fetal side of the polycythemic fetus, with poor
vascularization in the anemic fetus; ﬁnally, there was a velamentous
insertion of the umbilical cord in the anemic fetus.
It is not clear why the donor twin in cases of TAPS does not develop olygohydramnios and why the recipient does not develop a polyhydramnios
condition, such as TTTS. However, we should be aware of this unique
potential condition in managing MD twins.

Objectives: The purpose of this study was to compare morphology of
placental stem villi arteries between small-for gestational age (SGA) and
appropriate for gestational age (AGA) newborns among full-term singleton
pregnancy.
Methods: We studied the placentas from 45 singleton pregnancies delivered at Hamamatsu University Hospital from 2005 to 2011. Placentas were
classiﬁed into 2 groups, SGA newborns (n¼25) and AGA group (n¼20). All
cases had no complications such as pre-eclampsia. SGA newborns were
deﬁned as those whose birth weight was below the 10th percentile for that
gestational age. The control group comprised the placentas of term pregnancies elective cesarean section and those newborns birth weight were
appropriate for gestational age. The tissue section was stained with elastic
tissue van Gieson stains. The vessel wall thickness, luminal area and
obstruction ratio were measured. Semi-quantitive measurement of
collagen ﬁber in the vessel wall and immunohistochemistry were
performed.
Results: Stem villi morphometry revealed a reduction of stem vessels
lumina concomitant with increased intima and media in SGA newborns
placenta. Obstruction ratios were 6.4% and 20.8% in SGA and AGA
respectively. The ratios of the collagen to total vessel area were signiﬁcantly lower in SGA placenta than AGA placenta. Immunohistochemistry
revealed strong staining for 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine(8-OHdG)、
4-hydroxy-2-nonenal(４HNE) as oxidative stress marker in endothelial
cell of stem villous vessels in SGA placenta compared to AGA.
Conclusion: these signiﬁcant differences between SGA and AGA placenta
suggest possibility involved in the pathogenesis for SGA newborns.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A100

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.43

P2.44

VILLOUS FIBROSIS FOLLOWING CHRONIC VILLITIS IS THE MAIN
CAUSE OF FETAL GROWTH RESTRICTION

CHARACTERIZATION OF THE PLACENTAL DEVELOPMENT IN
THE INTRA-UTERINE GROWTH RETARDED PIGLET

Yuki Ito1,4, Kentaro Matsuoka1, Atsuko Nakazawa1, Haruhiko Sago2, Tadao
Tanaka4, Aikou Okamoto4, Kenichiro Hata3
1
Department of pathology, National center for child and development,
Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of maternal-fetal and neonatal medicine,
National center for child and development, Tokyo, Japan, 3Department of
maternal-fetal biology, National research institute for child health and
development, Tokyo, Japan, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
the Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan

Pauline Peugnet1,2, Anne Tarrade1,2, Céline Jousse3, Michel Guillomot1,2,
Marie-Christine Aubrière1,2, Isabelle Le Huëron-Luron4, Pascale ChavattePalmer1
1
INRA, UMR1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, F-78350
Jouy-en-Josas, France, 2ENVA, F-94700 Maisons Alfort, France, 3INRA,
UMR1019 Nutrition Humaine, F-63122 Saint Genes Champanelle, France,
4
INRA, UMR1079 Systèmes d’Elevage, Nutrition Animale et Humaine,
F-35590 Saint Gilles, France

Objectives: Chronic villitis is known to be associated with fetal growth
restriction (FGR). However, chronic villitis is also seen in placenta of
normal pregnancy. Chronic villitis shows various pathological features
such as inﬂammation, vasculopathy and villous ﬁbrosis. It has not been
clariﬁed what is essential for pathogenesis of FGR. In this study we
investigated the distinctive pathological feature of chronic villitis of FGR.
Methods: 21 placenta from FGR (<10th percentile) cases and 19 placenta
from non-FGR cases were pathologically analyzed retrospectively. This
study was conducted in national center for child and development, Japan
from April 2007 to December 2011. Below the 22nd week of gestation,
multiple, TORCH syndrome or fetal anomalies were excluded. Grade and
localization of inﬂammation, vasculopathy and villous ﬁbrosis were
analyzed. T cell inﬁltration was determined immunohistochemical staining
for cCD3. Severity of inﬂammation were graded into four groups; low and
focal, low and multi focal, high and patchy, high and diffuse. Expansion of
inﬂammation was divided into four levels ; stem villous level, intermediate
villous level, distal villous level and anchoring villous level.
Results: There were no statistical differences between the groups in
respect to maternal age, previous pregnancy history or delivery week.
Inﬂammation was more severe and spread to proximal in FGR group than
in non-FGR group. Villous ﬁbrosis and vasculopathy were both found more
frequently in FGR group than in non-FGR group (vasculopathy: FGR vs.
non-FGR ¼ 100% vs. 57.1% (p < .05). ﬁbrosis: FGR vs. non-FGR ¼ 90.5% vs.
31.6 %( p < .05)).
Conclusion: Villous inﬂammation is more severe in FGR cases. Also, fetal
growth was deﬁnitely inﬂuenced by the existence of villous ﬁbrosis and
vasculopathy of villitis.

Objectives: In pig production, the selection of hyperproliﬁc animals has
lead to an increased rate of intrauterine growth retarded (IUGR) piglets in
litters. This is an important economic issue as these piglets display higher
mortality rates, lower growth capacity and lower quality carcasses. The
purpose of this work was to investigate placental morphology and function
during early (45d), mid (71d) and late gestation (112d) in pairs of control
and IUGR siblings.
Methods: Altogether, 18 pairs were used (N¼5, 6 and 7 at 45, 71 and 112
days, respectively), each pair, but one, being of the same sex. The IUGR
piglets were 25%, 33% and 41% lighter than controls. Relative uterine and
placental proportions of blood vessels, connective tissue and trophoblast
were measured by stereology. Placental expression of genes involved in
fetal growth (IGF2), angiogenesis and vascularization (eNOS, VEGFa, FLT1,
KDR), nutrient transport (GLUT3, SNAT2, LPL) and oxidative stress
(SOD1, SOD2) was measured by RT-qPCR. Data were analyzed using MannWhitney test (morphometry) and ANOVA (gene expression).
Results & Conclusion: Morphometric analysis did not reveal any signiﬁcant difference according to gestational age nor group. IGF2 expression
was signiﬁcantly increased in IUGR placenta at 71d of gestation (x 1.48,
p<0.05) but there was no other signiﬁcant difference in gene expression.
The methylation of the IGF2 promoter was not signiﬁcantly different
between groups. Since IGF2 induces fetal and placental growth, its
increased expression in IUGR could be an early compensatory mechanism
to meet the fetal nutrient demand.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A101

P2.45

P2.46

A CASE OF PLACENTA FENESTRATA WITH FETAL GROWTH
RESTRICTION AND A NON-REASSURING FETAL STATUS
AT 29 WEEKS GESTATION

A CASE OF A RARE PLACENTA WHICH SHOWED NO
INDEPENDENT UMBILICAL CIRCULATION IN THE
SMALLER TWIN OF MONOCHORIONIC TWIN

Akira Sasaki, Osamu Samura, Shinya Kusumoto, Tomomi Yamazaki, Hiroko
Nakamura, Kazuhiro Takehara, Tomoya Mizunoe
Kure Medical Center / Chugoku Cancer Center, kure City, Japan

Aiko Kawano1, Kentaro Matsuoka2, Yoshinobu Sugo1, Hiroyuki Shigeta1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,Yokohama Municipal Citizen’s
Hospital, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan, 2Department of Pathology,National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan

We report a case of placental malformation that became an emergency
cesarean section due to apparent fetal growth restriction and nonreassuring fetal status. A 25 year-old woman at ﬁrst pregnancy had no
past history or complications. Although she went through her ﬁrst
trimester uneventfully, an ultrasonographic exam demonstrated fetal
growth restriction (-2.1SD) at 29 weeks of gestation. She had no diabetes,
thyroid gland dysfunction, antiphospholipid syndrome or pregnancyinduced hypertension syndrome.
There were no infectious diseases to cause the observed fetal growth
retardation. The ultrasound ﬁndings revealed a velamentous insertion of
the cord, and no deformity of fetus. There was no abnormal arterial
umbilical blood ﬂow at 29 weeks 3 days’-gestation. Amniotic ﬂuid volume
had decreased (liquor amnion pocket 1.5 cm), and a reﬂux of the arterial
umbilical blood ﬂow was observed by using ultrasound at 29 weeks 4
days’- gestation. The fetal heart rate monitoring revealed mild prolonged
bradycardia, and frequent variable deceleration. Because of non-reassuring
fetal status, and fetal growth restriction, we performed an emergency
cesarean section at 29 weeks 4 days gestation. The male baby was delivered at 840 g in weight, 33.5 cm tall. The Apgar score was 8 at 1 min and 9
at 5 min, umbilical cord arterial blood pH 7.336, and no anomalies noted.
The placenta was 250 g in weight (14*12.5*1.0 cm). The real part of the
insertion of the umbilical cord site in the placenta center suffered a loss,
and presented placenta fenestrata. The histopathological examination of
the placenta indicated that the chorioamnionitis and the funiculitis were
absent. It is suggested that intrauterine growth restriction and fetal
dysfunction occurred due to placental dysfunction by the velamentous
insertion with placenta fenestrata.

1

Objectives: We report a case of monochorionic(MC) twin with selective
intrauterine growth restriction(sIUGR) presenting intermittent absent or
reversed end-diastolic ﬂow (iAREDF) doppler pattern in the umbilical
artery.
Methods: A 31-years-old woman, gravid 0, para 0, visited our hospital at 7
weeks of gestation because of MC twin pregnancy. At 21 weeks of gestation, sIUGR and iAREDF were pointed out. The twins were delivered by
cesarean section at 34 weeks of gestation because of polyhyramnios of the
smaller twin. The larger baby was 1780g and Apgar score was 7 at 1
minute. The smaller baby was 1490g and Apgar score was 7 at 1 minute.
The placenta was examined by dye injection.
Results: Examination of placenta revealed that the distance between the
points of cord insertion was close. There were one large AA anastomosis,
38 artery to vein anastomoses, and no vein to vein anastomoses. All
umbilical arteries(UA) of the smaller twin circulated to the umbilical
veins(UV) of the larger twin, and all UVs of the smaller twin circulated to
the UAs of the larger twin. No independent circulation of the smaller twin
was found. The smaller twin was speculated to share 15% of whole
placental volume.
Conclusion: It is reported that iAREDF indicates the presence of large AA
anastomoses. It is also reported that poor outcome is often associated with
these pregnancies because of acute fetofetal transfusion through the large
AA anastomoses. However, AA anastomosis was essential for sIUGR
survival in this case since the smaller twin had no own placental circulation. It is not certain whether this particular vascular anatomy is the reason
for the good prognosis or not.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A102

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.47

P2.48

THROMBUS IN THE DECIDUA LEADING TO THE STILLBIRTH
AND INTRAUTERINE FETAL GROWTH RESTRICTION (FGR)

FETAL AND PLACENTAL GROWTH RESTRICTION IN MATERNAL
OBESITY IS NOT ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASED PLACENTAL
INFLAMMATION

Masayoshi Arizawa
Ohtsuka hospital, Toshimaku, Tokyo, Japan
Purpose: There is a group which does not show coagulation disorder
hematologically in repeated stillbirth or intrauterine Fetal Growth
Restriction (FGR). Thrombus in a large number of decidua, infarction, and
villous ischemic change is common in this group which does not show
coagulation disorder hematologically in repeated stillbirth or FGR.
Without evidence of coagulation disorder, I made pathological examination of the placenta looking for evidence pertaining to the group which
does not show coagulation disorder in repeated stillbirth or FGR. I estimated the grading of placenta ischemic change as a result of unknown
coagulation disorder, because if there is ischemic change it can possible
lead to stillbirth and FGR. In these cases, anticoagulation therapy was
successfully performed.
Materials, method: I diagnosed villous ischemia in 70 patients out of 125
FGR patients. In the Grading of placental ischemic lesions, Grade 1 shows
villous downsizing, ﬁbrosis, and the collapse of the villous blood vessel.
Grade 2 is not only villous downsizing, ﬁbrosis, the collapse of the villous
blood vessel, but also necrosis coheres, and small microscopic infarction.
Grade 3 is a massive thrombus, infarction, and extensive villous collapse
occurring diffusely.
Results: Many Grade 3 cases led to early delivery, and there was large
number of Grade 3, in which the degree of FGR was high.
Discussion: We were initially subjective, but the grading of the ischemic
change enabled us to become objective and clinical.

Rachael Crew, Peter Mark, Brendan Waddell
The University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia
Objectives: Maternal obesity induces fetal growth restriction in several
pregnancy models. This may be due to impaired placental function,
possibly because of increased placental inﬂammation or endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. This project investigated the placental mRNA
expression of pro-inﬂammatory factors and markers for ER stress within
the context of maternal obesity.
Methods: 8 week old female Wistar rats were raised on a cafeteria (CAF)
diet consisting of ad libitum access to rodent chow and 4 snack food items
rotated daily to maintain novelty. Control animals had access to chow only.
After 8 weeks of diet exposure, animals were mated and maintained on
their respective diets throughout pregnancy. Fetal and placental weights
were recorded and placental tissues were collected on day 21 of gestation.
Placental mRNA expression of inﬂammatory and ER stress markers were
measured in male labyrinth zones by RT-qPCR.
Results: CAF-fed animals were signiﬁcantly heavier than controls from
week 3 (13%) to week 8 (24%) of diet exposure. During pregnancy, CAF-fed
animals gained 16% more weight than controls. Maternal obesity in the
CAF group resulted in growth restriction in CAF fetuses (6% males, 10%
females) and whole placentas (15% males, 16% females). This corresponded
to a reduction in both JZ (19% males, 14% females) and LZ (13% males, 21%
females) weight.
Despite effects on fetal and placental growth, diet had no effect on male
labyrinth zone expression of inﬂammatory genes Tnfa, Il-6, Il-1b, Tlr2
orTlr4. Similarly, expression of ER-stress related genes Hsf2, Hsp90 and
Chop10 were also unaffected.
Conclusion: Despite fetal and placental growth restriction in a maternal
obesity model, this study noted no changes in mRNA expression of
inﬂammatory and ER stress related genes in male labyrinth zone tissue.
Further studies are required to determine the cause of the reduced fetal
and placental growth.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.49

P2.50

DECREASED EXPRESSION OF PROGESTERONE RECEPTOR (PGR)
IS ASSOCIATED WITH HUMAN IDIOPATHIC FETAL GROWTH
RESTRICTION

EVALUATION OF THE MECHANISM OF PRE-TERM DELIVERY
INDUCED BY IL-1b

Padma Murthi, Anthony Borg, Janet Stevenson, Penny Sheehan, Shaun
Brennecke
Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre and
University of Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Royal
Women’s Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia
Objectives: Progesterone is critical for the establishment and for the
maintenance of pregnancy. The effects of progesterone depend on the
availability of progesterone receptors (PGR) that act as nuclear transcription factor and modulates cell signaling pathways in a variety of reproductive processes. However, the role of PGR in human placental
pathologies including idiopathic fetal growth restriction (FGR) is
unknown. The aim of this study was to determine the expression of PGR in
idiopathic FGR-affected placentae compared with gestation-matched
controls (GMC) and to identify the functional role of PGR in trophoblasts.
Methods: Placentae (n¼25) from third trimester idiopathic FGR and GMC
were collected. PGR mRNA was determined by real-time PCR and protein
quantitation by immunoblotting. The effect of siRNA-mediated PGR geneinactivation on trophoblast function was determined in trophoblastderived cell line, BeWo. Trophoblast differentiation and apoptosis was
determined by real-time PCR using markers of differentiation such as
bhCG, 3bHSD, syncytin and markers of apoptosis such as caspase 3 and
p53.
Results: PGR mRNA was signiﬁcantly decreased in FGR-affected placentae
compared with GMC [0.53 0.09, FGR (n¼25) vs. 1.100.31, GMC (n¼25),
t-test, p<0.05]. Immunoblotting revealed reduced PGR protein (86 kDa) in
FGR compared with GMC. Following PGR inactivation, mRNA expression
for bhCG, 3BHSD, syncytin, caspase 3 and p53 were signiﬁcantly increased
in siRNA-treated BeWo cells compared with untreated control (n¼6,
p<0.05).
Conclusion: Decreased PGR expression observed in FGR may contribute to
increased trophoblast differentiation and apoptosis in human FGR.

A103

Hitomi Okabe1, Shintaro Makino1, Kiyoko Kato1, Hiroyuki Seki2, Satoru
Takeda1
1
Juntendo university, Tokyo, Japan, 2Saitama medical center, Saitama,
Japan
Objectives: Preterm birth is known to be characterized by increased levels
of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines (e.g. interleukin(IL)-1b) in the fetal
membranes, amniotic ﬂuid, and in the lower segment of the uterus.
On the other hand, progesterone（P4）is thought to be key factor for the
maintenance of pregnancy.
Recently, senescence-associated growth restriction with increased levels
of p21 in decidua cells have reported to participate in the processes of
preterm labor. In this study, we investigate the effects of supernatant of
a trophoblast cell line (TCL-1 cells) as well as these cytokines on the levels
of PTGS2(COX2) and PTGFR(FP), and induction of senescence in the
primary human decidual cells.
Methods: Decidua tissues were obtained for primary cell culture following
elective cesarean section.
We modeled the pre-term labor by decidual cells treated with IL-1b
in vitro．
Results:

1) In the decidual primary cultured cells treated with IL-1b, the
levels of PTGS-2 and FPmRNA were increased comparing with
vehicle.
2) The proportion of SA-b gal-positive cells was higher in the cells
treated with IL-1b than the cells treated with vehicle.
3) The level of PTGS2-mRNA was not controlled by PTGFR siRNA.
4) Up-regulated genes treated with P4þ IL-1b in decidua cell were
completely different from which treated with IL-1b alone.
Conclusion: We showed involvement of cell senescence induction by IL-1b
in the process of pre-term labor. These results suggest that some signals
derived from chorion trophoblast are associated with suppression of
induction of pre-term labor. And we check signal transmission to examine
FPsiRNA, PTGFR did not exist up stream. The differences in up-regulated
genes between P4þ IL-1b and IL-1b may suggest that P4 makes changes
in the suppression of genes toward anti-inﬂammation.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A104

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.51

P2.52

CHORIOAMNIONITIS AND FUNISITIS AFFECT THE SURVIVAL
RATES OF PRETERM INFANTS BORN AT 22 AND 23 WEEKS
OF GESTATION

RESIDUAL VASCULAR COMMUNICATIONS AFTER FETOSCOPIC
LASER SURGERY IN TWIN-TWIN TRANSFUSION SYNDROME:
FREQUENCY AND OUTCOME

Satoshi Urabe, Katunori Ueda, Saiko Urayama, Takashi Nosaka, Mituru
Sasaki, Yumiko Hirooka, Miho Kodama, Masatoshi kumagai, Hiroyuki Naito
Hiroshima Prefectural Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan

Makiko Egawa, Satoshi Hayashi, Kentaro Matsuoka, Rika Sugibayashi,
Masahiro Sumie, Seiji Wada, Haruhiko Sago
Center for Maternal-FetaNational Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan

Objectives: At present, preterm infants born at 22 or 23 weeks of gestation
are intensively managed in most of NICU units in Japan. We studied factors
that affect the survival rates of such preterm infants born in our hospital.
Methods: Thirty-tree singleton infants born alive at 22 and 23 weeks of
gestation between 2001 and 2011 were subjects of the study. We studied
obstetrical backgrounds of preterm birth, method of delivery, existence of
pathological chorioamnionitis (CAM) or funisitis and prognosis of the
infants.
Results: Ten infants was born at 22 weeks, and 23 infants was born at 23
weeks. Of these, premature rupture of membranes was observed in 14
cases (42.4 %). Caesarean section was done in 20 cases (60.6 %) due to
mainly a breech presentation. All the infants born at 22 weeks were
discharged alive. Of the 23 infants born at 23 weeks, however, 6 infants
(26.1 %) died in NICU. The main cause of neonatal death was; immaturity
(1), pneumothorax (3), sepsis (1) and cardiovascular failure (1). In the 27
survivors, high-grade (grade III) CAM and funisitis (with CAM) were
observed in 16 cases (59.3 %) and 9 cases (33.3 %), respectively. In contrast,
in the 6 infants died in NICU, grade III CAM and funisitis (with CAM) were
observed in 5 cases (83.3 %) and 4 cases (66.7 %), respectively.
Conclusion: The surviving rates of the infants born at 22 and 23 weeks of
gestation in our hospital was 81.8 % (27/33). Although the number of
present cases is not enough to be analyzed statistically, higher incidents of
CAM and funisitis were observed among the dead infants.

Objectives: In recent years, fetoscopic laser surgery (FLS) has been used to
treat twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) by coagulating placental
vascular anastomoses. It is known to improve the outcome of TTTS and has
gained worldwide recognition as the ﬁrst line of treatment. Postpartum
injection studies of the placenta can reveal if any residual vascular
communications (RVC) remain after FLS. The aim of this study was to
determine the incidence of RVC after FLS and to evaluate the perinatal
outcomes of cases complicated by RVC.
Methods: Patients who underwent FLS for TTTS at our institution between
March 2003 and December 2010 were included in this study. After birth,
placentas were inspected grossly and histologically, and the presence of
RVC was studied by placental resin injection. Placentas were divided into
those with and without RVC. The charts of patients treated with FLS were
reviewed to retrieve the preoperative, perioperative, and postoperative
obstetrical data.
Results: During the study period, 230 women with TTTS underwent FLS.
Intact placentas of 115 cases with dual survivors or double demise were
analyzed. Of these, thirteen placentas had RVC (11%). Arterio-arterial
anastomoses were recognized in 8 RVC cases, veno-venous anastomoses
in 7 cases and arterio-venous anastomoses in 9 cases. There were no
statistically signiﬁcant differences in maternal background, Quintero stage,
operative ﬁndings and location of the placenta between cases with and
without RVC. Survival to birth (77% vs. 96%, p<0.05), neonatal survival
(77% vs. 95%, p<0.05), and gestational age at delivery (28.54.7w vs.
33.04.0w, p<0.05) were signiﬁcantly lower in patients with RVC. Twin
anemia polycythemia sequence was diagnosed in patients with RVC, and
the incidence of recurrent TTTS was signiﬁcantly higher in patients with
RVC (4/13 vs. 0/102, p<0.05).
Conclusion: Outcomes in patients with RVC were poor, so it is important
to ﬁnd prepartum indicators for RVC.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.53

P2.54

FOXM1 IS DECREASED WITH HUMAN PRETERM LABOUR AND
REGULATES PRO-LABOUR CYTOKINES IN PRIMARY AMNION
CELLS

MASSIVE INTERVILLOUS FIBRIN DEPOSITION IN WOMEN
WITH RECURRENT PREGNANCY LOSS

Ratana Lim, Martha Lappas
University of Melbourne, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia
Objectives: The most important complication contributing to neonatal
mortality and morbidity is infection/inﬂammation-induced preterm birth.
While approximately one third of preterm births are indicated, the
remainder follow spontaneous labour (with intact membranes) or prelabour rupture of membranes (PROM). In non-gestational tissues, Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) is a transcription factor that regulates inﬂammation
and proliferation of tumour cells. The aims of this study were to determine
the effect of (1) human preterm labour on FOXM1 expression in human
gestational tissue, and (2) the effect of FOXM1 inhibition on proinﬂammatory and pro-labour cytokines in primary amnion cells.
Methods: FOXM1 mRNA expression was determined by qRT-PCR on fetal
membranes from women grouped as (1) preterm no labour: Caesarean
section with no labour and (2) preterm labour: after spontaneous labour
and normal vaginal delivery. In human primary amnion cells, FOXM1
knockdown was achieved using siRNA. After treatment with IL-1b, prolabour mediators were assayed.
Results: FOXM1 mRNA expression in fetal membranes was signiﬁcantly
decreased after preterm spontaneous labour. In primary amnion cells,
FOXM1 inhibition by siRNA increased IL-1b-induced cytokine mRNA
expression and release (IL-6, IL-8). Current experiments will determine the
effect of FOXM1 knockdown on the cyclooxygenase-prostaglandin
pathway.
Conclusion: We found that FOXM1 expression was down-regulated in
preterm labour fetal membranes, and knockdown of FOXM1 in primary
amnion cells showed an increase in IL-1b-induced pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines. With its anti-inﬂammatory actions in human pregnancy, more
studies are required to determine if FOXM1 can be used in the management of infection-induced preterm labour.

A105

Misako Iwata1,2, Msahiro Nakayama2, Masako Waguri2, Nobuaki Mitsuda2,
Itaru Yanagihara2, Tomio Fujita3
1
Tokyo Metropolitan Ohtsuka Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, 2Osaka Medical
Center and Research Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka, Japan,
3
Fujita Clinic, Osaka, Japan
Objective: Pathological examination of villi and placenta is performed for
women with recurrent pregnancy loss(RPL) in Osaka Medical Center for
Maternal and Child Health. The patients with recurrent massive intervillous ﬁbrin deposition(MIFD) have a poor prognosis. Then in order to ﬁnd
effective treatments, we investigated the RPL patients with MIFD.
Methods: We examined retrospectively the background previous pregnancy, inspection data, therapy and prognosis of 18 RPL patients with MIFD
who visited Osaka Medical center for Maternal and Child Health from 1998
to 2011.
Results: Pregnancy success rate of cases with once MIFD was 66%(6/9).Two
of them had not received treatment was successful. Pregnancy success rate
of cases with recurrent MIFD was 33%(3/9). In these cases, the treatment
was difﬁcult and the prognosis was poor. The successful three cases with
recurrent MIFD treated with low dose aspirin therapy (LDA), heparin and
steroids or LDA and steroids.
Conclusion: RPL patients with recurrent MIFD had a poor prognosis. But
our study has suggested that adding steroids to LDA or heparin probably be
effective for RPL patients with recurrent MIFD.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A106

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.55

P2.56

GSK3b IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ALTERED MCL-1 EXPRESSION IN
IUGR PLACENTAE

IDENTIFICATION OF COMPLETE HYDATIDIFORM
MOLE-RELATED MICRORNA

Jayonta Bhattacharjee1, Isabella Caniggia1,2
1
Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto,
Canada, 2Departments of Obstetrics & Gynaecology and Physiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Yuri Hasegawa1, Kiyonori Miura1, Ai Higashijima1, Shoko Miura1, Syuhei
Abe1, Ozora Jo1, Akira Kinoshita2, Hiroyuki Mishima2, Kentaro Yamasaki1,
Koh-ichiro Yoshiura2, Hideaki Masuzaki2
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki,
Sakamoto, Japan, 2Department of Human genetics, Nagasaki University,
Nagasaki, Sakamoto, Japan

Objectives: Pro-survival Myeloid cell Leukaemia Factor 1(Mcl-1), a critical
regulator of trophoblast cell fate, is a short-lived protein whose stability is
tightly regulated through post-translational modiﬁcation events including
caspase cleavage and phosphorylation leading to proteosomal degradation. Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3b (GSK3b) is central to Mcl-1 phosphorylation (P-Mcl-1). Notably, when phosphorylated at Serine 9, GSK3b
becomes inactive, while its phosphorylation at Tyrosine 216 residue
renders it functional. We reported that different mechanisms involving
caspase-mediated cleavage and MULE-dependent ubiquitination are
responsible for decreased Mcl-1 levels in preeclampsia (PE) and IUGR
respectively. However; Mcl-1phosphorylation status and its regulation in
placental pathologies remains unknown. Herein, we examined the role of
GSK3b in Mcl-1 phosphorylation in PE and IUGR placentae.
Methods: Placentae from pregnancies complicated by PE (n¼17), IUGR
(n¼20) and age-matched-controls (AMC) (n¼16) were used. P-Mcl-1, total
and phospho-GSK3b(p-S9-GSK3b and p-Tyr216-GSK3b) protein levels
were measured by immunoblotting using speciﬁc antibodies. Mcl-1/
GSK3b associations were assessed by immunoprecipitation. The effect of
GSK-3b on Mcl-1 phosphorylation was evaluated by treating Jeg3 choriocarcinoma cells with GSK-3b inhibitor IX.
Results: GSK3b inhibitor signiﬁcantly reduced P-Mcl-1 levels in Jeg3 cells
implicating a role for GSK3b in regulating Mcl-1 stability in trophoblast
cells. P-Mcl-1 and total GSK3b protein levels signiﬁcantly increased in
IUGR while, in stark contrast, their expression decreased in PE. Accordingly, despite Mcl-1 low levels, Mcl-1/GSK3b association increased in IUGR
whereas in PE this interaction was disrupted. Importantly, in IUGR,
increased levels of p-Tyr216-GSK3b associated with decreased p-S9-GSK3b
indicating that GSK3b is active in this pathology. Conversely in PE, GSK3b
was inactivated as p-Tyr216-GSK3b expression decreased while p-S9GSK3b levels increased.
Conclusion: In IUGR, decreased levels of pro-survival Mcl-1 are in part due
to activation of GSK3b pathway that in turn is liable for Mcl-1 phosphorylation thereby contributing to altered trophoblast cell death found in this
pathology (Supported by CHIR and Canada-Hope Fellowship).

Objective: Recently, circulating placental microRNAs in plasma from
pregnant women are expected to be biomarker for pregnancy-related
diseases. In this study, we tried to identify the microRNA marker of the
complete hydatidiform moles (CHMs) in plasma.
Methods: By next generation sequencing, top three out of microRNAs,
which expression level was higher in CHMs tissues than in normal villi
tissues, but no expression in blood cells, were selected as candidate CHMsassociated microRNAs. Subsequently, the expression levels of candidate
CHMs-associated microRNAs were conﬁrmed by quantitative real-time
reverse-transcription PCR, and the microRNAs predominantly expressed
in the CHMs tissues were identiﬁed as CMHs-associated microRNAs.
Finally, plasma concentrations of cell-free CHMs-associated microRNA
were measured before and after evacuation.
Results: The hsa-miR-520f, 520c-3p and 520b were selected as candidate
CHMs-associated microRNAs. The median (minimum-maximum) of
each multiple of median (MOM) values in control and CHMs were 1.00
(0.01-1.85) and 1.89 (0.02-4.23) for 520f, 1.00 (0.01-1.84) and 1.31
(0.01-2.95) for 520c-3p, and 1.00 (0.01-2.47) and 1.51 (0.02-2.54) for
hsa-miR-520b, respectively (Mann-Whitney’s U test, p<0.05). The median
plasma concentration of cell-free hsa-miR-520f in CHMs pregnancy was
signiﬁcantly higher than in normal pregnancy (27,194 copies/mL vs 13,118
copies/mL, Mann-Whitney U test, P¼0.002), and decreased signiﬁcantly
after evacuation (4,149 copies/mL, Wilcoxon signed rank test, P ¼ 0.002).
However, plasma concentrations of cell-free hsa-miR-520c-3p and -520b
in CHMs pregnancy did not show signiﬁcantly difference comparing with
those in normal pregnancy.
Conclusions: The hsa-miR-520f is CHMs-related microRNA and its plasma
concentration may be possible molecular marker of complete hydatidiform mole.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A107

P2.57

P2.58

MOLECULAR GENETIC DIAGNOSIS OF TWO RARE CASES OF
GESTATIONAL TROPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASIA

CLINICAL FINDINGS OF MULTIPLE PREGNANCY WITH
A COMPLETE HYDATIDIFORM MOLE AND COEXISTING FETUS

Sawako Fujiwara, Eiko Yamamoto, Momo Kan, Kaoru Niimi, Kanako
Shinjyo, Yukio Mano, Hiroyuki Tsuda, Seiji Sumigama, Tomomi Kotani,
Fumitaka Kikkawa
Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan

Kanako Mitsuzuka1, Akane Kondo1,2, Shigeru Sato1, Osamu Nishimura1,
Akira Mori1,3, Hitoshi Ishimoto1
1
Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan, 2Aiiku
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, 3Tokyo City University, Tokyo, Japan

Background: Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) during normal
pregnancy is very rare. The causative pregnancy of this type of GTN has the
potential to be antecedent pregnancy or current pregnancy. Genetic
diagnosis has proven important in the management of patients with GTN.
The objective of this study is to identify the causative pregnancy through
molecular genetic analysis.
Methods: DNA was prepared from cheek swab samples from the patient
and her partner. DNA from GTN and normal placental tissue was prepared
by using laser-capture microdissection technique. Using these DNA, PCR
ampliﬁcation and microsatellite genotyping were performed. The genetic
contributions to the GTN were determined by comparing the genotypes of
the GTN and those of the couples and normal placenta.

Objective: Twin pregnancies with a complete hydatidiform mole and
coexisting fetus (CHMCF) represent an obstetric challenge. The aim of this
report is to characterize the clinical features of this very rare disorder and
to discuss the diagnostic and therapeutic implications in light of the
literature.
Methods: Data from three women who were diagnosed as CHMCF at our
institution between 2007 and 2012 were reviewed. Gestational ages at
diagnosis, symptoms, serum beta-human chorionic gonadotropin levels,
immunohistochemical results, complications, route of delivery, pregnancy
outcome, and disease course were assessed.
Results: A diagnosis of CHMCF was made by ultrasound in two cases at
around 18 weeks’ gestation and in the other case at 13 weeks’ gestation.
One patient had been diagnosed as a large hematoma before referral to our
unit. All the cases underwent termination of pregnancy before 21 weeks’
gestation due to complications such as heavy bleeding and rupture of the
membranes. No one presented with preeclampsia and hyperthyroidism. In
all the cases, the in utero diagnosis of CHMCF was conﬁrmed pathologically and genetically. One patient developed metastasis to the lung and
needed chemotherapy.
Conclusions: Our three cases with complications resulted in termination
of pregnancy. However, reports in the literature indicate that the option of
pregnancy continuation can be offered when maternal complications are
absent or controllable. Nevertheless, patients should also be informed that
twin pregnancies with a hydatidiform mole carry an increased risk of
persistent and/or metastatic gestational trophoblastic disease compared
with single molar gestations, as demonstrated in our experience, and of an
unfavorable outcome for the fetus.

Case1: Intraplacental choriocarcinoma in a term placenta with
maternal metastases.
A 31-year-old woman, gravida 7, para 4, underwent an emergency
cesarean section at 38 weeks of gestation because of repeated melena
which were treated with blood transfusion frequently. At the laparotomy,
a jejunum tumor was seen and resected. This tumor was conﬁrmed as
choriocarcinoma pathologically and CT scan showed multiple metastases
of brain, lungs, liver, and colon. Detailed examination of the placenta
provided the ﬁnal pathological diagnosis which was term placenta with
focal intraplacental choriocarcinoma.

Case2: Placental site trophoblastic tumor (PSTT) diagnosed in
the ﬁrst trimester.
A 37-year-old woman, gravida 8, para 6, was pregnant for the 9th time.
Abdominal total hysterectomy was performed at the 11th week gestation
for artiﬁcial abortion and treatment for a huge myoma. Pathological
examination of the uterus revealed a PSTT besides a leiomyoma and
normal villi.
Results: Both cases were gestational in origin and the causative pregnancies were identiﬁed as current pregnancies.
Conclusion: Intraplacental choriocarcinoma and PSTT with normal pregnancy are extremely rare variants of GTN. Both of GTN are highly malignant
and the causative pregnancy is controversial. Therefore, it is reasonable to
identify the causative pregnancy by its genetic origin. We can determine
the causative pregnancy of GTN accurately by microsatellite polymorphism analysis.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A108

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.59

P2.60

A RARE CASE OF PARTIAL MOLE AND CO-EXISTING NORMAL
FETUS ORIGINATED FROM ONE EMBRYO SHOWS
PREECLAMPSIA-LIKE SYMPTOMS AT 19 WEEKS GESTATION:
ANGIOGENIC IMBALANCES IN MOLAR PLACENTA LEADING TO
HYPERTENSION, PROTEINURIA AND PLEURAL EFFUSION

A CASE OF EXTRAUTERINECHORIOCARCINOMA AFTER
DELIVERY OF INTRAUTERINE FETAL DEATH IN THE FIRST
PREGNANCY

Arihiro Shiozaki1, Kiyonori Miura2, Kyoko Takemura1, Rika Yonezawa1,
Noriko Yoneda1, Kaori Fukuda1, Mika Ito1, Satoshi Yoneda1, Hideaki
Masuzaki2, Shigeru Saito1
1
University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan, 2Nagasaki University School of
Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan
Case Report: We present a very rare case of single embryo-derived partial
mole with placental triploidy (69, XXX) and a 46, XX fetus. A 30-year-old
Japanese woman, gravida 0 para 0, was transferred to our hospital with
hypertension, proteinuria, weight gain, and respiratory discomfort at 19
weeks. A detailed ultrasonography depicted a large multicystic placenta
without dilated vessels around the cyst. Labor was induced at 20 week
because of clinical deterioration, followed by a vaginal delivery of a normal
female fetus and a molar placenta. After delivery, the patient’s blood
pressure rapidly normalised and the proteinuria resolved. An expelled
placenta macroscopically demonstrated villi with multiple hydropic cysts
and vesicles. The nuclei of the villous stroma and cytotrophoblastic cells
were positive for p57kip2 and cell culture showed placental triploidy
(69, XXX). A female fetus had normal karyotype (46, XX). The genetic
proﬁles using ﬁfteen polymorphic DNA markers demonstrated that the
fetus and the cord consisted of monospermic paternal allele and one
maternal allele, and that all examined genotypes of the placenta were
consistent with those of the fetus, showing that partial mole was originated from monospermic fertilization and ﬁrst in the world both the
partial mole and the fetus have their origin in a single embryo. The
maternal serum level of sFlt-1 (14,393 pg/mL), sEndoglin (127 ng/mL), and
the sFlt-1: PlGF ratio (476) were extremely high that have been reported.
The levels of sFlt-1 and sEndoglin in the cystic ﬂuid from placental mole
were also extremely high (104,000 pg/mL and 54 ng/mL, respectively). This
report conﬁrmed the hypothesis that preeclamptic symptoms are mediated by circulating factors of placental origin. This is a ﬁrst report that
showed paternal isodisomy in partial mole might contribute to angiogenic
imbalances in the placental tissue even in the absence of fetal triploidy.

Hiroshi Miyoshi1,2, Masaru Sasaki2, Eimi Rai2, Yosuke Kawakami2, Etsuko
Fujimoto2
1
Higashihiroshima Medical Center, Higashihiroshima, Japan, 2Onomichi
General Hospital, Onomichi, Japan
Objectives: We would report a rare case of extrauterinechoriocarcinoma
immediately after stillbirth at preterm in the ﬁrst pregnancy.
Case: The patient was 26 years old and had the ﬁrst pregnancy. The
pregnancy progress was normal until pregnancy 30 weeks but the fetus
died suddenly at preg.30wþ4d. She delivered by oxytocin induction at
preg.30wþ6d and the fetus was a girl at 1,330g. Then, the patient had sever
bradycardia on the 4th day after delivery and was introduced to our
hospital. We found multiple permeation shadows in chest X-rays and the
serum hCG was measured to be 409,700mIU/ml. Also, the ﬁndings of
cerebral infarctions and subarachnoid hemorrhage were observed in brain
CT, suggesting the presence of brain metastasis. However, no lesion of
choriocarcinoma was found in the uterus by CT, MRI and curettage
of endometrium. We sampled the tissue of the lung lesion by VATS (Video-Assisted Thoracic Surgery) and diagnosed as metastatic choriocarcinoma. She was diagnosed as extrauterinechoriocarcinoma after stillbirth.
Immediately, we carried out chemotherapy, two courses of MEA
(Methotrexate, Etoposide, Actinomycin-D) and eight courses of MTX
(Methotrexate 5 days). The serum hCG was decreased to be negative after
the eighth MTX treatment but small pulmonary shadows remains in the
lung.
Discussion: Unfortunately, the stillborn baby and placenta were already
cremated when she was admitted in our hospital. No macroscopic
abnormal ﬁndings in the placenta and no lesion of hydatidiform mole was
reported when she delivered in the previous clinic. Also, no evidence of
hydatidiform mole was observed by ultrasonic tomography during pregnancy. Choriocarcinoma in the lung was identiﬁed on seven days after
delivery, supposing that the choriocarcinoma might already develop
during pregnancy. Though it is hard to prove that this pregnancy is the ﬁrst
but it should be possible that the extrauterinechoriocarcinoma is originated from normal placenta.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A109

P2.61

P2.62

THE POLYMORPHISM OF FOLATE METABOLIC ENZYME GENES
MAY PREDICT THE OUTCOME OF METHOTREXATE THERAPY
FOR LOW-RISK GESTATIONAL TROPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASIA

THREE CASES OF INVASIVE MOLE ARISING FROM COMPLETE
MOLE WITHIN VERY SHORT PERIODS

Hirokazu Usui, Jia Qu, Hiroshi Kaku, Makio Shozu
Department of Reproductive Medicine, Chiba University Graduate School
of Medicine, Chiba, Japan
Objectives: The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of folate metabolic enzyme genes have been reported to be associated with toxicity and
efﬁcacy of methotrexate (MTX) in a variety of diseases. Especially, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), key enzyme in folate metabolism, has been widely analyzed. We investigated the association between
the functional SNPs of MTHFR C677T and the outcome of MTX treatment
for low-risk gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (LR-GTN).
Methods: Twenty-four cases of LR-GTN primarily treated with MTX
(20mg/body /day, day1-5, 14 days cycle) were included in this study. In
both patient’s blood and molar tissue of antecedent pregnancy, we
determined the genotype of MTHFR C677T by HybProbe assay and highresolution melting method with LightCyclerÒ, or by restriction fragment
length polymorphism analysis with gel electrophoresis. We evaluated the
resistant rate and the toxicity rate between CC and CT/TT genotype on
C677T.
Results: Thirteen patients were primarily remitted (PR group; 13/24),
whereas eleven patients needed second line regimen (non-PR group;
11/24). Seven patients of non-PR group discontinued treatment with MTX
toxicity (AD grope; 7/24), while the other four patients of them were
changed into another regimen because of MTX resistant (Resist group;
4/24). All patients in non-PR group achieved remission with second line
regimens. The MTX resistant rate in CT/TT genotypes of MTHFR C677T in
molar tissues (3/4) was higher than that in CC genotype (1/11) (P ¼ 0.03
Fisher’s exact test), which was the only signiﬁcant association among all
combinations of genotypes and clinical outcome in both patient’s blood
and molar tissue.
Conclusion: The CC genotype of MTHFR C677T in molar tissues of antecedent pregnancy may predict favorable results of 5-days MTX therapy for
LR-GTN.

Yuko Tanizaki, Sakiko Nanjo, Mika Mizoguchi, Nami Ota, Madoka Yamamoto, Aya Kobayashi, Yasushi Mabuchi, Shigetaka Yagi, Masaaki Iwahashi,
Sawako Minami, Kazuhiko Ino
Wakayama Medical University, Wakayam, Japan
Objective: Hydatidiform mole is an abnormal gestation identiﬁed by
trophoblastic proliferation and hydropic change in the chorionic villi.
Pathological diagnosis is clinically important to distinguish complete mole
from partial mole because the majority of post-molar trophoblastic
diseases arise from complete moles.
Methods: We show three cases of invasive mole arising within 3weeks
from complete moles. Immunohistochemistry was performed with
monoclonal antibodies against p57kip2.
Results:

Case1: A 21-year-old woman suspected molar pregnancy
underwent dilution and curettage (D&C). The initial pathological diagnosis was a partial mole. Only three weeks later, her
serum hCG was increased. Immunohistochemistry was performed with p57kip2, which shows negative p57kip2 expression in the villous cytotrophoblasts and mesenchyme.
Reviewing the histological specimen and performing MRI, CT
and trans-vaginal ultrasonography, we made a diagnosis of
complete mole developing invasive mole.
Case2: A 28-year-old woman underwent D&C at 9 weeks’
gestation. The pathological diagnosis was complete mole with
negative p57kip2 staining. Three weeks later, her serum hCG
was increased. She was performed MRI, CT, and trans-vaginal
ultrasonography, which diagnosed invasive mole.
Case3: A multipara 29-year-old woman was diagnosed a ectopic
pregnancy. She underwent D&C and right salpingectomy. They
diagnosed a partial mole. Two weeks later, her serum hCG was
increased and she was started systemic chemotherapy. Then she
was referred to our hospital. She underwent a total abdominal
hysterectomy with a pathological diagnosis of invasive mole.
Immunohistochemistry was performed with the result of
negative p57kip2 staining. We diagnosed invasive mole arising
from complete mole at interstitial tube.
Conclusion: Chemotherapy was performed and complete remission was
acquired in all three cases. Serial serum hCG measurements every
1-2weeks are needed within 4weeks following evacuation of complete
mole for detection of early onset of invasive mole. Since the pathological
diagnosis of complete mole is sometimes difﬁcult, the immunohistochemical detection with p57kip2 may be useful.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A110

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.63

P2.64

MORPHOLOGIC PECULIARITIES OF PAPILLAR THYROID
CARCINOMA METASTASING INTO PLACENTA

PLACENTAL IMMUNE RESPONSE WAS INCREASED IN
PREGNANT WOMEN WITH HEPATITIS B VIRUS WITH
PRECORE G1986A MUTANT

Tamara Zadorozhna, Yuri Antipkin
Institute of Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kiev, Ukraine
Objectives: to ﬁnd histologic and hystochemical peculiarities of placentas
from women operated for thyroid cancer during pregnancy
Materials: The 17 placentas from women of gestation age 38-40 weeks
operated due to thyroid papillary carcinoma. 16 cases was incapsulated
lesion (T1N0M0) and 1 case with invasion into the thyroid capsule and
distal metastasis (T3N0M1). Diagnosis was veriﬁed by professor T.Bogdanova (Ukrainian institute of endocrinology) and international experts of
thyroid cancer data bank. Control group was placentas from 40 healthy
women with gestation age 38-40 weeks.
Methods: Histological: hematoxilin-eosinum stain, picrofuxin Van-Gison
stain; Immunohistochemical: Anti-human antigen Ki-67 (Clone MIB-1
Dako) with calculation of proliferation index, anti-human CEA (Dako);
electron microscopy of syncytiotrophoblast villi (epon, contrast by Reinolds), electronic microscope SELMI.
Results: Macroscopic ﬁndings were similar in both groups. Atypical
syncytium proliferation, picnosis of nucleus, eosinophilia of cytoplasm of
syncytium villi was found in 2 cases from 17. Apoptosis of syncytium was
detected by electron microscopy.
Marked reaction of Ki-67 in nucleus of cyto- and syncytiotrophoblast with
signiﬁcant increase of proliferation index in main group was found. In 25%
of cases in main group was found high expression of CEA in stroma cells
cytoplasm and vascular endothelium.
In one placenta from woman operated in 22nd week of gestation for
invasive papillary thyroid carcinoma was found metastasis in intervillous
space with positive Ki-67 reaction.
Conclusion: In placentas of women operated for thyroid carcinoma during
pregnancy were found metastasis of papillary carcinoma in 1 case;
proliferative changes; high expression of Ki-67 in 50% of cases and CEA in
25% of cases.

Ying Lin1, Peiru Jiang1, JH Kiu1, YL Feng1, Baohua Chen1, Qi Chen2
1
Public Health Clinical Centre, Fudan University, Shanghai, China,
2
Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, The University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand
Introduction: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is endemic in China [1].
Vertical transmission of the infection mainly occurs in perinatal period and
is the major cause of HBV infection in China. Traditionally intrauterine
transmission of HBV infection to infants is believed to come from HBeAgpositive mothers. However, recent studies suggest that intrauterine
transmission of HBV infection also occurs from HBeAg- negative mothers
and may be due to a precore mutant (G1896A) of the HBV genome.
Placental hepatitis B infection is a major risk factor for intrauterine
transmission. This study aimed to investigate the placental immune
response in pregnant women with hepatitis B virus with the precore
G1986A mutant.
Methods: Placentae fromHBeAg- negative pregnant women with (n¼32)
or without (n¼29) precore G1896A mutant were collected after delivery
and the expression of HBsAg and HbcAg and numbers of CD3þ T cell and
CD68þ macrophages were measured. Levels of IL-2 expression were
measured by immunuohistochemistry.
Results:

1. HBsAg or HBcAg positivity was signiﬁcantly higher in HBeAgnegative pregnant women with the precore G1896A mutant
(19 out of 32 women, 59.38%), in comparison to HBeAgnegative pregnant women without the precore G1896A mutant
(9 out of 29 women, 31.03%)(p<0.05).
2. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the numbers of
CD3þ T cell and CD68þ macrophage were signiﬁcantly
increased in HBeAg- negative pregnant women with precore
G1896A mutant, compared to HBeAg- negative pregnant
women without precore G1896A mutant (p<0.01).
3. The positive rate of IL-2 was signiﬁcantly increased in HBeAgnegative pregnant women with precore G1896A mutant (25 of
32 pregnant women, 78.12%), compared to HBeAg- negative
pregnant women without precore G1896A mutant (4 of 29
pregnant women, 13.79%). Immunohistochemical images also
showed that the levels of IL-2 expression were higher in
trophoblasts.
Conclusion: These dates suggest that the T lymphocyte mediated immune
response was increased in intrauterine transmission of HBV infection from
HBeAg- negative pregnant women with the precore G1896A mutant.

[1] Williams, R. (2006). "Global challenges in liver disease".
Hepatology (Baltimore, Md.) 44:521–526.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A111

P2.65

P2.66

INFLUENCE OF LAMINARIA TENT INSERTION FOR PREMATURE
RUPTURE OF MEMBRANES AT TERM ON CHORIOAMNIONITIS

INCIDENCE AND MATERNAL FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH
PLACENTAL HEPATITIS B VIRUS INFECTION IN HEPATITIS
B SURFACE ANTIGEN CARRIERS

Kentaro Kurasawa1, Megumi Yamamoto1, Mika Okuda1, Tsuneo Takahashi1,
Fumiki Hirahara2
1
Yokohama City University Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 2Yokohama
City University, Yokohama, Japan
Objectives: There is no consensus as yet about the necessity for
mechanical cervical ripening in women with premature rupture of
membranes (PROM). We elucidated the inﬂuence of mechanical cervical
ripening on the mother and fetus, to establish proper management criteria
for PROM.
Methods: The study subjects were divided into Group A (singleton pregnant women with PROM at 37-41 weeks of gestation hospitalized to our
center until October 2010, whose deliveries were managed by insertion of
laminaria tents for unfavorable cervical ripening; n ¼ 486) and Group B
(pregnant women with PROM hospitalized to our center after November
2010, whose deliveries were managed without insertion of laminaria tents,
n ¼ 296). The patient backgrounds, complications, and perinatal outcomes
were retrospectively compared between the groups.
Results: No signiﬁcant differences in the patient backgrounds were
observed between the groups. There were also no differences in the
duration of labor, time from PROM to delivery, rate of cesarean section, rate
of non-reassuring fetal status, or meconium staining frequency between
the groups. No signiﬁcant differences were observed in the newborn
outcomes between the groups. Chorioamnionitis (CAM) was diagnosed in
27 patients in Group A (grade I in 10, II in 7, and III in 10 patients) and 15
patients in Group B (grade I in 8, II in 3, and III in 4 patients). The CAM
incidence did not differ either histopathologically or clinically between the
groups managed with and without laminaria tent insertion.
Conclusion: Although laminaria tent insertion was not associated with
any signiﬁcant increase in the CAM incidence, it did not appear to have any
signiﬁcant inﬂuence in reducing the time from PROM to delivery either.
Because laminaria tent insertion is highly invasive for pregnant women,
our results suggest that mechanical cervical ripening is unnecessary for
pregnant women with PROM at term.

Terence Lao1,2, Man-Kin Chung1,2, Tat-San Lau1,2, Theresa Cheung1,2, Russell Ng1,2, Tak-Yeung Leung1,2, Vincent Wong1,3, Henry Chan1,3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, 2Department of
Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong,
3
Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin,
Hong Kong
Objectives: Placental infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) is found in
women screened positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), but the
related factors remain unclear. We examined the incidence of and
maternal factors associated with placental HBV infection in this study.
Methods: Gravidae with positive antenatal screening for hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg) were recruited at the antenatal clinic for the
assessment of maternal HBV e antigen (HBeAg), viral DNA in maternal
blood and placenta (TaqMan real-time polymerase chain reaction),
hemoglobin, and alanine transaminase (ALT) in the second and third
trimesters. Cases with and without placental HBV DNA were compared.
Results: 33 of the 94 cases studied (35.1%) had HBV DNA detected in
placenta. While there was no signiﬁcant difference in maternal characteristics, this group had high incidence of HBeAg (OR 122.2, 95% CI
14.5-1026.8), and higher HBV DNA level in the second and third trimester,
together with higher ALT in the third trimester.
Placental HBV DNA

Age (years)
35 years 9%)
Multiparous (%)
Height (cm)
<152 cm (%)
Booking weight (kg)
Booking body mass index (kg/m2)
25 kg/m2
Hepatitis e antigen (%)
Hemoglobin (g/dL) – 2nd trimester
Hemoglobin (g/dL) – 3rd trimester
ALT (mmol/L) 2nd trimester
ALT (mmol/L) 3rd trimester
HBV DNA (log10 copies/ml) – 2nd
trimester
HBV DNA (log10 copies/ml) – 3rd
trimester

P value

Presence

Absence

31.03.9
18.2
53.1
158.15.7
6.1
56.911.5
22.63.8
27.3
69.0
11.30.9
11.31.0
69.2245.4
32.841.2
6.9232.554

32.04.7
32.8
62.7
158.95.3
5.0
54.78.5
21.73.2
16.7
1.8
11.40.7
11.31.1
17.96.9
16.75.7
1.5561.684

0.301
0.131
0.374
0.485
0.828
0.303
0.189
0.225
<0.001
0.622
0.740
0.278
0.042
<0.001

6.5052.545

1.6201.552

<0.001

Conclusion: A third of HBsAg carriers had placental infection, which was
associated with higher incidence of HBeAg, ALT level, and circulating HBV
DNA, which was likely to be the underlying reason for the placental
infection.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A112

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.67

P2.68

IMPLICATIONS OF PLACENTAL HEPATITIS B VIRUS INFECTION
IN MATERNAL HEPATITIS B SURFACE ANTIGEN CARRIERS ON
PREGNANCY OUTCOME

VIPERIN, AN ANTIVIRAL PROTEIN, IS INDUCED BY TOLL LIKE
RECEPTOR 3 (TLR3) LIGATION IN HUMAN TROPHOBLASTS

Terence Lao1,2, Man-Kin Chung1,2, Tat-San Lau1,2, Theresa Cheung1,2,
Russell Ng1,2, Tak-Yeung Leung1,2, Vincent Wong1,3, Henry Chan1,3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, 2Department of
Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong,
3
Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin,
Hong Kong
Introduction: The mechanism of vertical transmission of hepatitis B virus
(HBV) infection in high endemicity populations is uncertain. We suspect
that this operates through HBV infection of the placenta before the fetus
becomes infected.
Methods: Gravidae screened positive for hepatitis B surface antigen
(HBsAg) were recruited at the antenatal clinic. Cord blood and placental
tissue were collected at delivery for the extraction and measurement of
HBV DNA (TaqMan real-time polymerase chain reaction). Pregnancy
outcome, newborn acid-base status, and presence of HBV DNA in cord
blood, were compared between cases with and without placental HBV
DNA detected.
Results: 33 of the 94 cases studied (35.1%) had HBV DNA in placenta. This
group has fewer antepartum hemorrhage and more gestational diabetes,
but these did not reach statistical signiﬁcance (Table). In this group, cord
arterial pCO2 was signiﬁcantly lower, and incidence of HBV DNA in cord
blood was higher (OR 25.78, 95% CI 2.83-234.82).
Placental HBV DNA

Antepartum hemorrhage (%)
Preterm labor (%)
Pregnancy hypertension (%)
Gestational diabetes (%)
Placental insufﬁciency (%)
Vaginal delivery (%)
Cord arterial pH
Cord arterial base deﬁcit (mmol/L)
Cord arterial pO2
Cord arterial pCO2
Cord blood HBV DNA þve (%)

Presence

Absence

6.3
3.0
3.0
18.2
21.2
81.8
7.2550.068
7.213.11
2.740.93
6.181.40
47.1

11.5
1.6
3.3
9.8
18.0
85.2
7.2340.067
6.663.46
2.520.70
6.891.19
3.3

P value

0.418
0.656
0.948
0.247
0.708
0.665
0.161
0.469
0.290
0.015
<0.001

Bo Wang1,2, Kaori Koga2, Yutaka Osuga2, Danqing Chen1, Hefeng Huang1
1
Women’s Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, China, 2University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: Viperin is a cytoplasmic antiviral protein, named for the
characteristics of virus inhibitory protein, endoplasmic reticulumassociated, interferon-inducible. Toll like receptor 3 (TLR3) is a receptor
which recognizes viral double stranded RNA and triggers immune reactions upon viral infection. It has been shown that trophobalsts express
TLR3, and TLR3 ligation results in trophoblasts productions of chemokines
and anti-viral molecules. In the present study, we showed that the
expression of viperin in human trophoblasts and its induction by TLR3
ligation.
Methods: Under informed consents, human villi samples were obtained
from cases of induced abortion in the ﬁrst trimester. The expression
of viperin was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Trophoblasts were
isolated and cultured. Swan 71, a ﬁrst trimester trophoblast cell line was
also used. Cells were stimulated with PIC (TLR3 speciﬁc ligand,10 mg/ml).
Viperin mRNA and protein expression were evaluated by real time PCR and
Western Blotting respectively. To examine whether IFN-b was involved in
PIC-induced viperin expression, a neutralizing antibody to human IFN-b
was added before PIC treatment.
Results: Viperin localized in the cytoplasm of trophoblasts. PIC signiﬁcantly induced viperin expression in mRNA (P < 0.01) and protein (P <
0.01) levels in a dose- and time- dependent manner. Pretreatment
trophoblasts with neutralizing antibody to IFN-b (20 mg/ml) signiﬁcantly
reduced PIC-induced viperin mRNA compared with non-immune rabbit
IgG (P < 0.001).
Conclusion: This study showed that viperin is expressed by trophoblasts
for the ﬁrst time. It is also demonstrated that viperin is induced by TLR3
ligation, and this is mediated by IFN-b. Induction of viperin is one of the
immune responses provoked by trophoblasts upon viral infections.

Conclusion: In HBsAg carriers, HBV infection of the placenta is likely to be
the main event preceding fetal infection and plays the major role in
vertical transmission. This may also account for the higher incidence of
pregnancy complications reported previously.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A113

P2.69

P2.70

UP-REGULATION OF GLUTAREDOXIN GENE EXPRESSION UPON
PLACENTAL HEPATITIS B INFECTION

EXPRESSION OF PLACENTAL TOLL-LIKE RECEPTORS-3, -7 AND
-8 UPON PLACENTAL HEPATITIS B INFECTION

Man-Kin Chung1,2, Tat-San Lau1,2, Russell Ng1,2, Theresa Cheung1,2, Vincent
Wong1,3, Henry Chan1,3, Tak-Yeung Leung1,2, Terence Lao1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, 3Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Man-Kin Chung1,2, Tat-San Lau1,2, Wai-Ting Lui1,2, Russell Ng1,2, Theresa
Cheung1,2, Vincent Wong1,3, Henry Chan1,3, Tak-Yeung Leung1,2, Chi-Chiu
Wang1,2, Terence Lao1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, 3Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Objective: To investigate the effect of placental Hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection on the glutaredoxin (GLRX) gene expression level and its correlation with placental HBV DNA level.
Methods: HBsAg positive mothers, identiﬁed by antenatal screening, were
recruited in the antenatal clinic. After delivery, fresh placental tissues were
collected for DNA/RNA extraction (QIAamp DNA min-kit, Qiagen). HBV
DNA and GLRX expression level were detected by quantitative real-time
PCR. The GLRX expression level was normalized to GAPDH for comparison between the HBsAg/HBV DNA positive (N¼20) and HBsAg negative
control groups (N¼30), and the placental GLRX expression level was
correlated with the placental HBV DNA quantity, maternal age, maternal
body mass index (BMI), birthweight and Apgar score (1 minute) of the
newborn.
Results: HBsAg/HBV DNA positive placenta showed a signiﬁcant upregulation of the GLRX gene expression (P¼0.006), but in this group of
pregnancies, there was no difference in maternal age (32.13.1 vs 30.14.5
years; P¼0.094), birthweight (3226386 vs 3165428 grams; P¼0.609)
and Apgar score (9.10.2 vs 8.91.1; P¼0.385), and only maternal BMI was
higher (23.84.0 vs 20.82.1; P¼0.005). Moreover, placental GLRX
expression was correlated with the quantity of the HBV DNA detected in
the placenta (Rho¼0.395, P¼0.005) and maternal BMI (Rho¼0.409,
P¼0.003) but not for maternal age (Rho¼0.241, P¼0.091), birthweight
(Rho¼0.090, P¼0.534), or Apgar score (Rho¼0.028, P¼0.848).
Conclusion: Placental infection with HBV was associated with signiﬁcantly
increased expression of placental GLRX gene, which was correlated with
the quantity of HBV DNA in the placenta, as well as maternal BMI. This may
reﬂect increased oxidative stress in these placentas. Increased oxidative
stress in these pregnancies could be one of the mechanisms for the
observed increase in pregnancy complications.

Objective: To investigate the placental Toll-like receptors (TLRs)-3, -7 and
-8 mRNA/protein expression level in the presence of Hepatitis B virus
(HBV) infection.
Methods: HBsAg seropositive mothers were recruited during antenatal
visit. After delivery, fresh placental tissues were collected for DNA/RNA
extraction (QIAamp DNA min-kit, Qiagen). HBV DNA and TLR-3, -7, and -8
mRNA expression levels were quantiﬁed by real-time PCR. The expression
levels were normalized to GAPDH for comparison between the HBsAg/HBV
DNA positive (N¼20) and HBsAg negative control groups (N¼30).
Immuno-histochemical staining was performed for the semiquantiﬁcation of the TLRs protein level between groups.
Results:
Placental HBV DNA

Maternal age (yrs)
BMI (Kg/m2)
Birthweight (grams)
Apgar Score

Difference

Positive (n[20)

Negative (n[30)

32.1  3.1
23.8  4.0
3226  386
9.1  0.2

30.1  4.5
20.8  2.1
3165  428
8.9  1.1

NS
P¼0.005
NS
NS

Results are expressed in mean  SD.HBsAg/HBV DNA positive placentas
showed a signiﬁcant up-regulation of TLR7 (P¼0.009) and TLR8 (P¼0.012),
but not TLR3 (P¼0.303), gene expression, and Immunohistochemical
staining conﬁrmed increased activation of TLR7 and TLR8, but not TLR3, in
these placentas. Signiﬁcant correlation was found between placental TLR7
with TLR8 expression (Rho¼0.824, P<0.001), but not between TLR3 with
TLR7 (Rho¼-0.121, P¼0.408) or with TLR8 (Rho¼-0.184, P¼0.205)
expression. Placental HBV DNA level was correlated with TLR8
(Rho¼0.304, P¼0.034), showed a borderline correlation with TLR7
(Rho¼0.260, P¼0.071), but not with TLR3 (Rho¼0.138, P¼0.343),
expression.
Conclusion: Increased expression of TLR7 and TLR8 in the HBsAg/HBV
DNA positive placentas, which was correlated with HBV DNA levels,
suggest that this is probably a consequence of HBV infection. Further
studies on the response of the innate immune system and TLR pathways to
maternal viral infections could help to elucidate the mechanisms of
in-utero HBV infection.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A114

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.71

P2.72

EFFECTS OF CYTOMEGALOVIRUS INFECTION ON PLACENTA IN
A GUINEA PIG MODEL

DO MALARIA PARASITES BIND TO THE PLACENTA EARLY IN
PREGNANCY? EVIDENCE FROM A RELEVANT PLACENTAL
ADHESION ASSAY

Souichi Yamada1,2, Saki Fukuchi1, Harutaka Katano3, Kaede Hashimoto1,2,
Yoshiko Fukui1, Mihoko Tsuda1, Yuko Sato3, Naoki Inoue1
1
Department of Virology 1, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Shinjyuku, Tokyo, Japan, 2University of Yamanashi, Kofu, Yamanashi, Japan,
3
Department of Pathology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Shinjyuku, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is the most common cause of
congenital virus infection. Congenital infection occurs in w0.3% of all
births in Japan, and causes birth defects and developmental abnormalities,
including sensorineural hearing loss and developmental delay (Koyano
et al., 2011). Since guinea pig CMV (GPCMV) crosses the placenta and
causes infection in utero, guinea pig models are valuable for understanding
pathogenesis as well as for developing therapeutics for congenital infection. We demonstrated congenital CMV-associated labyrinthitis in
a guinea pig model in which vertical infection by GPCMV occurred through
the placenta (Katano et al., 2007). In this study, to understand effects of
GPCMV infection on the placenta in guinea pigs, we performed pathological and virological analyses of infected placentas and characterized
changes of cellular gene expression in the placentas.
Methods: Guinea pigs (strain Hartley, Japan SLC) 2-, 3- or 4-week after
conception were inoculated subcutaneously with GPCMV. Blood, placenta,
fetus and other organs were collected at various time points after the
inoculation. Immunohistochemistry was done by using monoclonal antibodies against GPCMV. Viral loads were determined as genome copy
numbers by real-time PCR. Total RNA samples were isolated from placenta
tissues, and used for microarray analyses with custom array-slides (Agilent
Technologies).
Results: Our ﬁndings are as follows. 1) Animals in early and mid-term
pregnancies were more susceptible to infection, which frequently resulted in IUGR of fetus. 2) Histologically there were no apparent changes in
infected placentas. 3) Infection in placentas was detected in limited areas.
4) Expression of several genes, mainly those relating to cell differentiation
and metabolisms but not to inﬂammation, were affected by infection.
Conclusion: The lack of apparent impairment of placentas in histology and
the signiﬁcant effects of infection on expression of particular genes suggest
that CMV impairs functions of the placenta, which results in IUGR.

Alexandra Umbers1, Sarah Hanieh2, Maria Ome2, Regina Wagnapi2, Inoni
Betuela2, Peter Siba2, Ivo Mueller2,3, Jocelyn Glazier4, Stephen Rogerson1,
Phillippe Boeuf1
1
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic, Australia, 2PNGIMR, Goroka,
Papua New Guinea, 3CRESIB, Barcelona, Spain, 4University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK
Objectives: Placental malaria, deﬁned by the accumulation of malariainfected erythrocytes (IE) in the intervillous spaces, impairs placental
function. Yet, we have an incomplete understanding of the interaction
between placenta and IE. At term, IE adhere to chondroitin sulphate A
(CSA) on the syncytiotrophoblast microvillous membrane, but little is
known about the dynamics of IE placental adhesion during the course of
pregnancy. Therefore, we studied the placental binding characteristics of
IE derived from malaria isolates collected at various gestational ages.
Methods: We used a high throughput ﬂow cytometry-based IE placental
adhesion assay [1] to determine the binding characteristics of IEs collected
from eight Papua New Guinean women between 19 and 36 weeks gestation as compared to a CSA binding control parasite line.
Microvillous plasma membrane (MVM) vesicles were isolated from term
placentae from uninfected pregnancies, stained with a ﬂuorescent lipid
dye, and incubated with ethidium bromide-stained IE. The IE bound to
MVM vesicles, and the ability of soluble CSA to inhibit this adhesion, was
used to characterize IE placental adhesion.
Results: IE from malaria isolates showed a similar level of MVM adhesion
as compared to the control parasite line (2713% vs. 254%, P¼0.9).
Placental adhesion of IE was dynamic across gestation and increased 2.5
fold from 19 to 28 weeks (P¼0.08). In a pilot experiment, we found that IE
collected before mid-gestation were more likely to bind to MVM in a CSAindependent manner, compared with isolates infecting women after mid
gestation.
Conclusion: The adhesion assay can be applied to study placental adhesion characteristics of IE in malarial pregnancy from the second trimester
onwards. Further studies are required to determine whether a shift from
CSA-independent to CSA-dependent placental adhesion occurs over
pregnancy, in order inform whether the hypothetical CSA-adhesion based
malaria vaccine would protect women from malaria over the duration of
pregnancy.

[1] Boeuf P, Hasang W, Hanssen E, Glazier JD, Rogerson SJ. Relevant
assay to study the adhesion of Plasmodium falciparuminfected erythrocytes to the placental epithelium. PLoS One.
2011, 6(6): e21126.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.73

P2.74

PLASMODIUM FALCIPARUM MALARIA ELICITS INFLAMMATORY
RESPONSES THAT IMPAIR PLACENTAL AMINO ACID
TRANSPORT

SEVERE INTRAUTERINE HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS INFECTION

Philippe Boeuf1,2, Elizabeth Aitken1, Upeksha Chandrasiri1, Caroline Chua1,
Bernie McInerney3, Leon McQuade3, Michael Duffy1,2, Malcolm Molyneux4,5, Graham Brown1,6, Jocelyn Glazier7, Stephen Rogerson1,2
1
The University of Melbourne, Department of Medicine, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia, 2Victorian Infectious Diseases Service, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 3Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF),
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia, 4Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome
Trust Clinical Research Programme, College of Medicine, University of
Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi, 5School of Tropical Medicine and University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK, 6The Nossal Institute for Global Health, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 7Maternal and Fetal
Health Research Centre, University of Manchester, St. Mary’s Hospital,
Manchester, UK
Placental malaria can lead to poor neonatal outcomes, including low
birthweight due to fetal growth restriction (FGR), especially when associated with local inﬂammation (intervillositis). The pathogenesis of
placental malaria-associated FGR is largely unknown but, in idiopathic
FGR, impaired transplacental amino acid transport, especially through the
group of amino acid transporters system A, has been implicated.
Objectives: We hypothesized that placental malaria-associated FGR could
result from impairment of transplacental amino acid transport triggered
by intervillositis.
Methods: Malawian women with uninfected placentas or with placental
malaria with or without intervillositis were recruited together with their
infants. We used laser capture microdissection and real-time quantitative
RT-PCR to measure transcript levels of system A isoforms in the syncytiotrophoblast. Naþ-dependent MeAIB uptake into vesicles of the microvillous plasma membrane of the syncytiotrophoblast was used as
a measure of system A activity. To gain insight into the mechanisms of
placental malaria-associated FGR, we developed an in vitro model of
placental malaria with intervillositis using BeWo cells and monocyte/
malaria conditioned medium. Amino acid concentrations in paired
maternal and cord plasmas were quantiﬁed by reversed phase ultra
performance liquid chromatography.
Results: System A transcript levels and activity were reduced in placental
malaria, especially when associated with intervillositis, compared to
uninfected placentas. BeWo cells exposed to monocyte/malaria conditioned medium showed decreased system A activity. Amino acid analysis
revealed speciﬁc alterations of amino acid transport by placental malaria,
especially with intervillositis.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that the fetoplacental unit responds to
placental malaria by altering its placental amino acid transport to maintain
adequate fetal growth. However, intervillositis more profoundly compromises placental amino acid transport function, leading to FGR. Our study
offers the ﬁrst pathogenetic explanation for FGR in placental malaria.

A115

Reina Komatsu1, Kei Hayata1,2, Reiko Asano1, Masako Saito1, Madoka
Sekino1, Yukiko Kagawa1, Hideki Nakatsukasa1, Masae Yorimitsu1, Akio
Masumoto1, Yukiko Kosaka1, Makoto Ishida1, Jun Noma1, Nobutaka
Yoshida1
1
Hiroshima City Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan, 2Tottori City Hospital, Tottori,
Japan
Introduction: Neonatal herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection is usually
acquired at birth. Intrauterine HSV infection is rarely documented and the
prognosis is generally considered poor. We report a case of an intrauterine
HSV infection.
Case Report: A 27-year-old primigravida was referred to our department
at 26 þ 5 weeks of gestation due to pregnancy induced hypertension and
fetal growth restriction (FGR). Her past medical history was unremarkable.
She had no history of a genital HSV-infection. His husband was suffered
from facial palsy after a month of her last menstrual period. Her blood
pressure was 177/97mmHg and 1.98g/day of urinary protein was detected.
Our ultrasound scan showed severe FGR (460g, -3.9SD), without other
structural abnormalities. The amniotic ﬂuid index was decreased. The
umbilical artery end-diastolic velocity was absent. The placenta was thick
and small. Due to progressive rise in her blood pressure and fetal growth
arrest, C-section was selected at 27þ0 weeks of gestation. A female baby
weighing 458g was delivered with Apgar score of 5(1’)/5(5’). The
placenta was small, measuring 13.010.0cm, and weighing 152g. At
delivery, the infant had a tendency to bleed and the ultrasonography
demonstrated hepatic bleeding. Although hemostatic surgery was done on
the 3rd day of life, she lost her life on the 5th day. On later, the placental
pathology showed that several necrotic abscesses in the intervillous spaces
and immunoreactive HSV-1 and HSV-2 were tested positive in the
chorionic cells and the trophoblast.
Conclusion: The case of an intrauterine HSV infection is presented. She
had no history of a genital lesion, the time of onset of fetal infection was
uncertain. Although intrauterine HSV infection is rare, clinicians, particularly when the patient complicate with severe FGR, should be alert to the
fact that severe invasive HSV disease can occur without history of a genital
HSV infection.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A116

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.75

P2.76

THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN GRADE THREE FUNISITIS AND
FETAL INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE SYNDROME (FIRS)

VESICLE-BASED CURCUMIN FORMULATION FOR THE TOPICAL
APPLICATION TARGETED TO VAGINAL INFLAMMATION DURING
PREGNANCY

Kaori Yamazaki, Keiko Muramatsu, Kotomi Nagahashi, Chizuko Yaguchi,
Toshiyuki Uchida, Kazunao Suzuki, Hiroaki Itoh, Naohiro Kanayama
Hamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka-ken, Japan
Objective: Fetal inﬂammatory response syndrome (FIRS), as characterized
by elevated levels of fetal plasma inﬂammatory cytokines (i.e. interleukin6 et al.), is an independent risk factor for the occurrence of severe neonatal
morbidity. It was proposed that high levels of fetal plasma inﬂammatory
cytokines could cause grade three funisitis, especially subacute necrotizing
funisitis (SNF); however, its speciﬁcity or sensitivity to FIRS is still
controversial. The aim of present study was to investigate the association
between grade three funisitis, including SNF, and onset of FIRS.
Methods: 551 singleton deliveries in Hamamatsu University Hospital from
April 2010 to March 2011 were retrospectively examined from medical
records of both mothers and neonates. All placentas and umbilical cords
were histologically examined.
Results: There were 17 cases of grade three funisitis among 551 umbilical
cords (3.1%), which included 2 cases of SNF (0.36%). The rate of SNF in grade
three funisitis was 11.8% (2/17). There were two cases of FIRS. One case of
FIRS was characterized by bronchopulmonary dysplasia, in which chorioamnionitis grade 3 and SNF were observed. Another case of FIRS was
manifested by encephalomalacia, in which chorioamnionitis grade 3 and
funisitis grade 3, but not SNF, were observed. There was one normal
uncomplicated neonate, in which chorioamnionitis grade 3 and SNF were
observed.
Conclusion: It was suggested that SNF or grade three funisitis may be
necessary, but not sufﬁcient, condition of the onset of FIRS. Since SNF was
observed in an intact neonate, further investigation is necessary to clarify
the pathological association between FIRS and severe funisitis.

Purusotam Basnet1,2, Ganesh Acharya1,2, Martha Hentemann1,2, Natasa
Skalko-Basnet3
1
Women’s Health and Perinatology Research Group, Department of Clinical medicine, University of Tromsoe, Tromsoe, Norway, 2Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsoe,
Norway, 3Drug Transport and Delivery Research Group, Department of
Pharmacy, University of Tromsoe, Tromsoe, Norway
Objectives: Vaginal inﬂammation during pregnancy is linked to miscarriage, preterm labour, placental dysfunction and perinatal complications.
Despite the availability of several anti-inﬂammatory drugs in the market,
there is no general consensus regarding safe formulation especially for use
in early pregnancy. Turmeric (powdered rhizome of Curcuma longa) has
been traditionally used as an anti-inﬂammatory remedy and considered as
safe. One of its widely investigated pharmacologically active components
is curcumin (>14544 citations in SciFinder) which has conﬁrmed strong
anti-oxidant and anti-inﬂammatory properties. However, due to its poor
solubility and low bioavailability, its clinical application remains challenging. Our aim was to develop a non-teratogenic and non-toxic
substance which can be used in early pregnancy for the treatment of
vaginal inﬂammation.
Methods: Curmumin/curcuminoids (curcumin analogues) were standardized by UV-VIS/HPLC/MS/NMR. Liposomal curcumin/curcuminoids
were characterized through their stability, size and entrapment efﬁciency.
Antioxidant activities were evaluated by DPPH/ABTSþ/O.-2 and SOD activities. Anti-inﬂammatory activities were evaluated by measuring LPSinduced NO and pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such as IL-1b, TNF-a, IL-8
in macrophages (J774.1) and LPG-induced cytokines IL-8 in human
vaginal cells lines (End1/E6E7, Ect1/E6E7, VK2/E6E7). Antioxidant and antiinﬂammatory activities of curcumin and their corresponding vesiclebased formulation were compared.
Results: Nanoparticles (approx. 200nm), phospholipid-based vesicles
were found to be stable and incorporating high amount of curcumin/curcuminoids. Liposomal curcumin was found to be 2-6 folds more potent
than curcumin in inhibiting NO production and pro-inﬂammatory cytokines in macrophages. IL-8 was inhibited up to 67% by the liposomal
curcumin in human vaginal cell lines (End1/E6E7, Ect1/E6E7, VK2/E6E7)
compared to curcumin. A mixture of curcuminoids was found to be more
soluble and more potent than individual compounds in respect to their
antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory activities.
Conclusion: Standardized liposomal curcuminoids might be an appropriate, effective and safe topical formulation for the treatment of vaginal
inﬂammation in early pregnancy.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.77

P2.78

THE INVOLVEMENT OF ENZYMES WHICH ACTIVATE AND
INACTIVATE ENDOTHELIN-1 (ET-1) IN HUMAN LABOR ONSET

THERAPEUTIC EFFECT OF MATERNAL HYDROGEN WATER
ADMINISTRATION IN A MOUSE MODEL OF FETAL BRAIN
DAMAGE

Tomomi Kotani, Seiji Sumigama, Hiroyuki Tsuda, Yukio Mano, Tomoko
Nakano, Kaoru Niimi, Sawako Fujiwara, Satoshi Matsukawa, Yuriko
Watanabe, Li Hua, Fumitaka Kikkawa
Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan
Objectives: The mechanisms of human labor onset remain unclear, but its
interpretation is important to deﬁne the pathology of preterm labor. We
previously reported that S1P, which is involved in inﬂammation, play a role
in human labor onset via induction of cox-2 and MMP-9. Others have
reported that endothelin (ET) -1, an uterotonin, is increased during labor.
The aim of the present study was to determine the role of ET-1 on human
labor the relationship of S1P and ET-1.
Methods: Amnions were obtained with informed consent from normal
pregnancies following caesarean (labor (-)) and vaginal deliveries (labor
(þ)). The expression of endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE), which
synthesizes ET-1, and neutral endopeptidase (NEP), which inactivates ET-1,
were investigated in amniotic tissues in labor þ/- by Western blotting. The
ET-1 levels were also examined by ELISA. The expression of ECE-1 in
cultured human amnion epithelial cells (HAECs) or mesenchymal cells
(HAMCs) with or without inﬂammatory cytokines, oxytocin and S1P
treatment was investigated by Western blotting. In the mouse model of the
intra-abdominal administration of lipopolysaccharide, the expressions in
placenta were examined by Western blotting.
Results: The expressions of ECE-1 were increased, but that of NEP was
decreased in amnion of labor (þ) vs. labor (-). Then ET-1 was signiﬁcantly
elevated in amnion of labor (þ). HAECs and HAMCs primarily expressed
ECE-1 and NEP, respectively. The expression of ECE-1 in HAECs was
signiﬁcantly induced by treatment with TNF-a, IL-1b and S1P, while NEP
levels in HAMCs were decreased. However, oxytocin had no effect on those
expressions. In addition, NEP was decreased in the placentas with
administration of lipopolysaccharide in comparisons to those with saline.
Conclusion: Those results suggest that ET-1 was increased by inﬂammation via the metabolizing enzymes. S1P also induced ET-1 and these
molecules might play a role in human labor co-coordinately.

A117

Tomoko Nakano, Tomomi Kotani, Yukio Mano, Satoshi Matsukawa, Yuka
Hattori, Yuriko Watanabe, Hiroyuki Tsuda, Seiji Sumigama, Li Hua, Fumitaka Kikkawa
Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya city,Aich pref,
Japan
Objectives: Oxidative stress caused by inﬂammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species has been reported to be involved in the onset of the
perinatal brain damage at intra-amniotic infection. In addition, by using an
in utero infection model mouse with the LPS (lipopolysaccharide) intraperitoneal administration, it has been reported that antioxidizers are
useful for the prevention of the embryo brain disorder. However, there
remain few approaches reaching the clinical application. In this study, the
protective effect of hydorogen water, which has been already reported to
have both antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory action, were investigated in
an embryo brain disorder model. Hydrogen water is clinical applied
saturation water in other ﬁelds now.
Methods: Water or hydrogen water was given to pregnant mice at 14days
in free drinking style for 24 hours. Then they were treated with LPS
5mg/body or PBS intraperitoneally. Samples were collected 24 hours later
and examined as below mentioned.

1) The expressions of inﬂammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-1b, TNF-a)
in fetal brains and placentas by qRT-PCR.
2) The expression of activated caspase-3, which was a marker of
apoptosis, in fetal brains by immunohistochemsitry.
3) The expression of cox-2 in placentas by Western blotting
Results:

1) By the LPS dosage, IL-6 expression was remarkably increased in
embryo brain, where this induction was completely suppressed
in the LPS - hydrogen water administrated group (P<0.01).
2) Activated caspase-3 expression was increased in LPS dosage,
but it was reduced by the hydrogen water dosage (P<0.01).
3) Cox-2 expression was increased in LPS dosage, but it was
partially suppressed by the hydrogen water dosage (P<0.01).
Conclusion: In the perinatal brain damage model by LPS treatment, IL-6
might be a key molecule. The mother’s body hydrogen water dosage
suppressed IL-6 in fetal brain, might have a protective role on perinatal
brain damage by inﬂammation, but further examination is needed.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A118

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.79

P2.80

MATERNAL CHARACTERISTICS AND PERINATAL OUTCOMES OF
WOMEN WITH HISTOLOGIC CHORIOAMNIONITIS AT THE
NATIONAL CENTER FOR GLOBAL HEALTH AND MEDICINE

ABERRANT INFLAMMATION IN PREGNANT RATS INDUCES
RENAL ALTERATIONS, PROTEINURIA AND UTERO-PLACENTAL
OXIDATIVE STRESS

Jun Kakogawa1, Kazufusa Hoshimoto2, Miyuki Sadatsuki1, Naohiro
Kanayama3
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Center for Global
Health and Medicine, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Pathology,
Teikyo University School of Medicine, Itabashi, Tokyo, Japan, 3Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan

Maria Komisarenko, Tiziana Cotechini, Shannyn Macdonald-Goodfellow,
Charles Graham
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada

Objective: To evaluate the maternal characteristics and perinatal
outcomes of women who were histologically diagnosed with chorioamnionitis at the National Center for Global Health and Medicine.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective study in which we enrolled all
singleton pregnant women at our hospital whose placentas had been
pathologically examined upon delivery between January 2005 and August
2010. We compared the maternal characteristics and perinatal outcomes of
women with histologic chorioamnionitis with those of women without
any histological ﬁndings. We also evaluated prenatal outcomes and the
incidence of funisitis among the cases of chorioamnionitis, according to
Blanc’s stages of placental inﬂammation.
Results: A total of 146 women with and 146 women without histologic
chorioamnionitis were enrolled. There were no differences in the mean
maternal age, the incidence of preterm delivery, the mode of delivery and
the incidence of low birth weight between the groups. The women with
histologic chorioamnionitis were signiﬁcantly more likely to be primiparous, less likely to have sought prenatal care and more likely have delivered post term. In a multiple logistic regression analysis, the failure to seek
prenatal care was an independent factor in predicting the risk for developing histologic chorioamnionitis (odds ratio, 0.13; 95% conﬁdence
interval, 0.03-0.62). Among the 146 women with histologic chorioamnionitis, 45 cases were identiﬁed as showing Blanc’s placental
inﬂammatory stage 1 on histology, 81 cases were identiﬁed as showing
stage 2, and 19 cases were identiﬁed as showing stage 3 inﬂammation. The
women who were diagnosed with Blanc stages 2 and 3 chorioamnionitis
had a signiﬁcantly higher incidence of histologic funisitis compared with
the Blanc stage 1 women.
Conclusions: Our ﬁndings show that the risk for chorioamnionitis
increases with inadequate prenatal care and postterm delivery and could
be mitigated by the proper provision of prenatal care or the appropriate
perinatal interventions.

Objectives: Glomerular endotheliosis (GEN) is a PE-speciﬁc renal alteration characterised by glomerular endothelial hypertrophy, capillary
occlusion and sub-endothelial ﬁbrin deposition. Hypercellularity of the
glomerulus, occlusion of glomerular fenestrations, pedicel effacement and
thickening of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) have also been
reported in association with conﬁrmed cases of PE. Additionally, proteinuria is a hallmark feature of PE-associated renal dysfunction. Using
a recently developed inﬂammation-mediated rat model of IUGR, this study
determined whether aberrant inﬂammation is causally linked to the
development of PE-associated renal pathologies.
Methods: To induce aberrant maternal inﬂammation, dams received intraperitoneal injections of lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 10-40 mg/kg) on gestational days (GD) 13.5-16.5. To elucidate the role of tumour necrosis factora (TNF-a; a pro-inﬂammatory molecule) in the pathophysiology of GEN,
LPS-treated rats were administered EnbrelÒ (TNF-a inhibitor; 10 mg/kg).
Additionally, to investigate whether deﬁcient nitric oxide (NO) signalling is
important to the development of GEN, a transdermal nitroglycerin patch
(GTN; 25 mg/h; NO-mimetic) was administered to LPS-treated rats.
Results: Kidneys from LPS-treated animals exhibited alterations characteristic of GEN. Transmission electron microscopy revealed LPS-induced
thickening of the GBM and pedicel effacement. While EnbrelÒ treatment
inhibited GEN it did not prevent GBM thickening. Administration of GTN,
however, attenuated all inﬂammation-induced renal alterations. Proteinuria was associated with abnormal inﬂammation and was prevented with
either EnbrelÒ or GTN. Renal alterations were found to be pregnancy
speciﬁc; thus, placentas from LPS-treated animals were examined for
evidence of oxidative stress. Immunohistochemistry against nitrotyrosine
revealed that EnbrelÒ or GTN prevented LPS-induced utero-placental
oxidative stress.
Conclusions: These results provide evidence that aberrant inﬂammation
during pregnancy is causally linked to the development of renal alterations
possibly by a mechanism associated with deﬁcient NO-signalling. These
ﬁndings support the potential use of TNF-a inhibitors and NO-mimetics in
the treatment of renal alterations associated with PE/IUGR.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.81

P2.82

SREBP-1C AND HCHOP-C/EBPa INVOLVEMENT IN INSULIN
MODULATION OF HENT2 ACTIVITY IN HUMAN PLACENTA
MICROVASCULAR ENDOTHELIUM FROM GESTATIONAL
DIABETES

PLACENTAL FINDINGS IN OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA

Carlos Salomon1,2, Francisco Westermeier1, Enrique Guzman-Gutierrez1,
Pablo Arroyo1, Fabian Pardo1, Andrea Leiva1, Paola Casanello1, Murray
Mitchell1,2, Gregory Rice1,2, Luis Sobrevia1
1
Cellular and Molecular Physiology Laboratory (CMPL) & Perinatal
Research Laboratory (PRL), Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Medical Research Centre (CIM), School of Medicine, Faculty of Medicin,
Santiago/metropolitana, Chile, 2University of Queensland Center for Clinical Research, Brisbane/Queensland, Australia
Objectives: Insulin restores gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)-reduced
hENT2 activity and expression (including SLC29A2 transcriptional activity)
in human placenta microvascular endothelial cells (hPMEC). Nitric oxide
(NO) synthesis is modulated by insulin and activated by the transcriptional
factors hCHOP-C/EBPa and SREBP-1c, but nothing is known in hPMEC. We
studied insulin effect on hCHOP-C/EBPa and SREBP-1c activity in hPMEC
from GDM.
Methods: hPMEC were isolated from full-term normal or GDM pregnancies and cultured under standard conditions. hENT2-mediated adenosine
transport (10 mM adenosine, 2 mCi/ml [3H]adenosine, 22oC), protein
abundance and mRNA were determined in absence or presence of insulin
(1 nM, 8 hours) by Western blot and Q-PCR. Transcriptional activity of two
fragments of the SLC29A2 promoter region (pGL3-hENT2-1483, pGL3hENT2-593) was measured by luciferase assay. hCHOP-C/EBPa and SREBP1c protein abundance and activity was assayed by western blot and
chromatin immuneprecipitation, respectively.
Results: Insulin increased hENT2-mediated adenosine transport by w10
and w1.7 fold in hPMEC from GDM and normal pregnancies, respectively.
This effect was paralleled by the recovery of hENT2 expression (protein
and mRNA). Insulin also increased the promoter activity of pGL3-hENT21491
, but not pGL3-hENT2-602 in cells from normal (1.8  0.1 fold) and GDM
(2.5  0.3 fold) pregnancies. hCHOP-C/EBPa protein abundance and
activity were reduced by insulin in GDM cells (2.9  0.4 fold), but increased
(2.3  0.3 fold) in cells from normal pregnancies. Insulin increased SREBP1c protein abundance (w2.6 fold) and activity in cells from GDM or normal
pregnancies.
Conclusion: hCHOP-C/EBPa and SREBP-1c could play a role in the
modulation of SLC29A2 expression and hENT2 activity in the fetoplacental
microvascular endothelium in GDM.
Support: CONICYT (ACT-73 PIA, AT-24100210, Pasantía Doctoral en el
Extranjero BECAS Chile), FONDECYT (1110977, 1120928, 11110059). EG-G,
CS and FW hold CONICYT-PhD fellowships. CS and PA hold Faculty of
Medicine/PUC-PhD fellowships.

A119

Mai He1,3, Geralyn Lambert-Messerlian1,3, Patrizia Curran2, Susan Martin2,
Ghada Bourjeily2,3
1
Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Women & Infants
Hospital of Rhode Island, Providence, Rhode Island, USA, 2Women’s
Medicine Collaborative, Miriam Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island, USA,
3
Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode
Island, USA
Objectives: Sleep disordered breathing during pregnancy has been
associated with adverse maternal outcomes. We reported previously an
increased incidence of hypertensive disorders and gestational diabetes
mellitus (GDM) associated with sleep disordered breathing. This study
further investigated the placental ﬁndings in OSA.
Methods: This was a retrospective case-control study of pregnant women
with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). The control group consisted of women
with a negative screen for OSA. Gestational age at delivery, placental
weight percentile, ﬁndings of gross and microscopic examinations of
placenta were collected. Placental ﬁndings were further classiﬁed into four
categories. Frequency of pathological ﬁndings in OSA and control groups
was compared by Fisher’s exact test with P<0.05 as signiﬁcant.
Results: Fifteen placentas (10 term and 5 preterm) were available from
women with OSA. There was one preterm stillbirth due to uteroplacental
insufﬁciency. Forty-ﬁve placentas (32 term and 13 preterm) were
randomly selected from the control group. There was one preterm stillbirth with no cause of death determined. Signiﬁcant pathological ﬁndings
in placentas from women with OSA included decidual vasculopathy
(7/15 vs 8/45, P<0.05), abruption (3/15 vs 1/45, P<0.05), increased
syncytial knots (8/15 vs 8/45, P<0.05). Signiﬁcantly more “delayed villous
maturity” was identiﬁed in term placentas with maternal OSA (3/10 vs
1/32, P<0.05). All above ﬁndings are related to maternal underperfusion.
There were no signiﬁcant differences in small-for-gestational age
placentas or preterm birth.
Conclusions: Signiﬁcant changes related to maternal underperfusion were
found in the placentas with maternal OSA. Decidual vasculopathy is often
seen in hypertensive disorders and GDM and is regarded as underlying
causes leading to infarct and abruption. Delayed villous maturity in term
placenta is often seen with maternal GDM. These ﬁndings are consistent
with clinical outcome ﬁndings and suggested a potential relationship
between altered sleep patterns and placental underperfusion and reaction.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A120

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.83

P2.84

PLACENTAL FINDINGS IN PREGNANCIES WITH MATERNAL
OBESITY

IMPAIRED GLUCOSE TOLERANCE MAKES AN INFLUENCE ON
THE PLACENTAL PATHOLOGY

Mai He1,3, Patrizia Curran2, Susan Martin2, Geralyn Lambert-Messerlian1,3,
Ghada Bourjeily2,3
1
Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Women & Infants
Hospital of Rhode Island, Providence, Rhode Island, USA, 2Women’s
medicine collaborative, the Miriam Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island,
USA, 3Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island, USA

Chizuko Yaguchi, Naomi Furuta, Hiroaki Itoh, Kaori Yamazaki, Kotomi
Nagahashi, Keiko Muramatsu, Naoaki Tamura, Toshiyuki Uchida, Kazunao
Suzuki, Kazuhiro Sugihara, Naohiro Kanayama
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu city, Japan

Objectives: Obesity has become a worldwide epidemic. In the United
States, close to 20% of pregnant women are obese. Obesity during pregnancy leads to a wide spectrum of maternal, fetal and neonatal complications. The aim of this study was to examine the relationship between
maternal obesity and placental histopathology.
Methods: This was a retrospective case-control study of placental
pathology. Cases (BMI>30) and controls (BMI<25) were randomly
selected. Placental weight, gross and microscopic pathology, and clinical
parameters were extracted from medical records. Placental weight range
was deﬁned as small-for-gestational-age (SGA) if < 10th percentile and
large-for-gestational-age (LGA) if >90th percentile. Placental pathology
was further classiﬁed into maternal underperfusion, fetal circulation
obstruction, infection/inﬂammation or others. The prevalence in the two
groups was compared with Fisher’s exact test (P<0.05 ¼ signiﬁcant).
Results: Median age was 29 in the obese group (n¼50, 18-40) and 30 in the
control group (n¼46, 19-40). Mean BMI was 35.98 þ/- 4.89 in the obese
group and 21.90 þ/- 2.33 in controls. There was signiﬁcantly more gestational diabetes (GDM) in the obese group (13/50 vs 2/46, P¼0.004). In
placentas of obese mother, histopathology related to underperfusion was
commonly observed (71.4%) and 12.5% related to infection/inﬂammation,
without signiﬁcant differences seen between the 2 groups. There were
signiﬁcantly more LGA placentas in the obese versus non-obese (13/50 vs
2/46, P¼0.003; even after adjusting for GDM). More marginal insertion of
the umbilical cord was also noted in the obese group (11/50 vs 2/46,
P<0.05).
Conclusions: This study provides a preliminary description of the
placental pathology in pregnancy with maternal obesity. LGA placentas
and marginal insertion of cord are more common in obese women, even
after adjusting for GDM. These results suggested that maternal obesity
may have effects on both placental implantation and growth.

Objectives: The purpose of this study is to investigate pathologic differences of the placenta in pregnancies complicated by gestational diabetes
(GDM/DM).
Methods: ﬁfteen pregnancies complicated by gestational diabetes were
obtained from January 2010 to December 2011at Hamamatsu University
Hospital. We reviewed all histological samples of the placentas. The
histological assessment for villous immaturity, villous ﬁbrinoid necrosis
and abnormalities of the vascular lesions were carried out.
Results: thirteen cases of gestational diabetes group were treated with
Insulin or diet therapy (improved group), and another two cases were
untreated (fetal death group). In improved cases, the presence of degenerative lesions such as ﬁbrinoid necrosis was apparent. Villous edema or
reduction of vasculo-syncytial membranes in terminal villi were found in
60% cases. Villous immaturity, the presence of syncytial knots as an indication of chronic fetal hypoxia and ﬁbrosis in the stem villous vessels were
signiﬁcantly increased. In fetal death group, histological ﬁndings show
extensive infarction, ﬁbrinoid necrosis or villous immaturity and narrowed
or obstructed change in stem vessels.
Conclusion: A histological abnormality, that is, villous immaturity or
vascular pathological change such as obstructed vessels in stem villi, were
observed in the diabetic placentas. Impaired glucose tolerance makes an
inﬂuence on feto-placental circulation and placental development. These
ﬁndings support the hypothesis that impaired placental function is one of
the main reasons for the increased frequency of fetal complications in
diabetic pregnancies

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A121

P2.85

P2.86

EFFECT OF OBESITY AND FETAL GENDER ON EXPRESSION OF
MITOCHONDRIAL ELECTRON TRANSPORT COMPLEXES AND
BIOENERGETICS IN HUMAN PLACENTA

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SERUM LEVELS OF D-DIMER AND
WEIGHT OF PLACENTA IN THE LATE PREGNANCY

James Mele, Alina Maloyan, Leslie Myatt
UTHSCSA, San Antonio, Tx, USA

1

OBJECTIVES, METHODS, RESULTS, CONCLUSION

Objective: It is well known that coagulation is enhanced during pregnancy
and serum levels of D-dimer increase gradually toward the late stage of
gestation. The main cause of this increase is thought to be local degeneration of ﬁbrin in the uteroplacental circulation. However, there is no report
that proves D-dimer is generated in the placenta. We investigated whether
serum levels of D-dimer correlated with placental weight.
Method: We enrolled 59 women with singleton pregnancies who had
measurements of platelet counts, hematocrit, and serum levels of FDP and
D-dimer at 35 or 36 weeks of gestation and delivered normal birth weight
babies within 14 days after these measurements. The mean value and
standard deviation of each parameter were evaluated retrospectively.
Relationships between these values and placental weight, and the other
background data (age, parous number, height, body mass index, weight
gain, birth weight) were examined.
Results: Platelet counts, hematocrit, FDP, D-dimer, and placental weight
were 231  97  103/ml, 33.4  3.0%, 5.0  3.1 mg/ml, 2.4  1.5 mg/ml, and
578  91 g, respectively. The serum levels of D-dimer correlated with
placental weight (R ¼ 0.400, p ¼ 0.0015), FDP (R ¼ 0.801, p < 0.0001), and
hematocrit (R ¼ -0.311, p ¼ 0.0162), but did not with birth weight. Simple
linear regression formula between serum levels of D-dimer and placental
weight was evaluated: [ D-dimer ( mg/ml )]¼ -1.316 þ 6.5  [ placental
weight ( g)]  10-3; R2 ¼ 0.160.
Conclusions: That the serum levels of D-dimer in the late pregnancy
correlated with weight of placenta suggests that D-dimer is generated in
the placenta. The regression formula of D-dimer according to placental
weight might be available in investigating hypercoagulability during the
third trimester.

Objectives: Obesity is associated with chronic inﬂammation and
mitochondrial dysfunction in many tissues. We determined the effect of
increasing maternal BMI and of fetal sex on ATP generation and gene
expression of mitochondrial electron transport chain subunits in villous
tissue and on trophoblast mitochondrial respiratory function in vitro.
Methods: Villous tissue was collected following c-section (no labor) at
term. cDNA was prepared from placentas of both genders from lean,
overweight and obese women (n¼4/group) and expression of 84 genes
involved in oxidative phosphorylation determined using the Mitochondrial Energy PCR Array (SaBiosciences). Villous ATP levels were measured
with chemiluminesence. Primary cytotrophoblasts were isolated from
women of BMI range 18.5 to 45 (n¼12/gender), syncytialized over 72hr
and mitochondrial bioenergetic parameters measured using a XF24
analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience).
Results: With increasing BMI, placentae of male fetuses showed 1.2-1.7
fold (p<0.05) downregulation of genes in complexes I, IV and V, suggesting
adaptation/dysfunction. In contrast, with increasing BMI, placentae from
a female fetus showed increased gene expression of a smaller number of
subunits particularly catalytic subunits from complexes II and V.
Comparisons between genders revealed that placentae from a female fetus
of lean women displayed a 1.5x higher expression of complex V assembly
factor OXA1L and of LHPP phosphatase whereas increased expression of
catalytic complex I and V subunits, NDUFS7 and ATP6V1E2 was seen in
obese women. Villous ATP levels decreased signiﬁcantly with increasing
BMI in males but not females, agreeing with energetic array data. In syncytiotrophoblast basal and maximal respiration, spare capacity, and
non-mitochondrial respiration but not ATP coupled respiration or proton
leak, showed a signiﬁcant inverse correlation with increasing maternal
BMI. The effect was more marked in trophoblast from males.
Conclusions: A sexually dimorphic effect of increasing maternal adiposity
on placental mitochondrial function is seen. Placental energetic capacity is
compromised to a greater extent in the male fetus.

Norifumi Tanaka1, Yoshiki Kudo2
Higashihiroshima medical center, Higashihiroshima, Japan, 2Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A122

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.87

P2.88

HUMAN MACROPHAGES REGULATE CHORIONIC
GONADOTROPIN WITH TRUNCATED LH/CG RECEPTOR

MECHANICAL MODELLING OF SYNCYTIAL NUCLEAR
AGGREGATES; CAN THEY PASS THROUGH SMALL
PULMONARY VESSELS?

Munekage Yamaguchi, Takashi Ohba, Naoko Yoshizato(Sonoda), Hironori
Tashiro, Hidetaka Katabuchi
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Life Science, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan
Objectives: The major role of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in
early pregnancy is to maintain the corpus luteum for persistent progesterone production. Maternal hCG also enters fetal plasma via the mesenchyme of the placental villi and promotes male sexual differentiation;
therefore, excess fetal hCG induce aberrant genital differentiation. We have
hypothesized that hCG is regulated by macrophages in the stroma of
placental villi, known as Hofbauer cells. The present study analyzed the
expression of luteinizing hormone (LH)/CG receptor with a deletion of
exon 9 (LH/CG-R D9) in human macrophages and assessed whether LH/CGR D9 was speciﬁcally involved in the degradation of hCG.
Methods: Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-treated THP-1 cells
were exposed to 1,000 mIU/ml of hCG, LH or follicle stimulation hormone
(FSH). The incorporation of each gonadotropin into the cells was evaluated
by immunocytochemistry. The expressions of cytoplasmic LH/CG receptor
and a-tublin were analyzed by western immunoblotting. Their timedependent morphological changes were also examined.
Results: Immunocytochemistry showed that PMA-treated THP-1 cells
selectively took up hCG. Western blotting analyses demonstrated that
PMA-treated THP-1 cells expressed a 60-kDa protein designated endogenous LH/CG-R D9 and that hCG induced transient reduction of the LH/CG-R
D9. hCG also induced transient reduction of a-tublin in PMA-treated THP-1
cells. Vacuoles formation mimicking the structure of Hofbauer cells was
transiently induced by hCG in PMA-treated THP-1 cells.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that the LH/CG-R D9 is speciﬁcally
involved in the degradation of incorporated hCG. hCG-LH/CG-R D9
complex may be trafﬁcked into lysosome by the cytoskeletal remodeling
with microtubules. The degradation may lead to change the structure of
PMA-treated THP-1 cells to the vacuolated form mimicking human
placental Hofbauer cells, which may degrade hCG with cytoplasmic
LH/CG-R D9 to protect the fetus from exposure to excess maternal hCG
during pregnancy.

Olivia Holland, Chun Goh, Alistair Young, Alys Clark, Larry Chamley,
Martyn Nash
The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Objectives: Syncytial nuclear aggregates (SNAs) are large (average diameter of 66 mm) multinucleated cell bodies that are shed from the syncytiotrophoblast into the maternal blood. Due to their large size, most SNAs
are trapped in the small vessels of the maternal lungs but some SNAs pass
through the pulmonary capillaries into the maternal peripheral blood.
This preliminary study examined the mechanical behaviour of SNAs to
determine why some SNAs can pass through the pulmonary capillaries.
Methods: Forty-four SNAs were harvested from fourteen ﬁrst trimester
placentae (8.0–12.6 weeks) as published, and individually aspirated into
glass micropipettes using pressure-calibrated micromanipulators. The
deformation and entry/exit ﬂow of the SNAs into w20 mm micropipettes at
pressures up to 3,450 Pa was recorded. Apparent viscosity (h, force
required to move one layer of ﬂuid in relation to another), cortical tension
(T0, surface tension which resists surface area increase), dissipation ratio
(m, loss rate of energy) and critical pressure at aspiration were calculated.
Results: SNAs could be divided into two groups, those that did recover
their shape after aspiration into the micropipette (n ¼ 15, 34%) and those
that did not (n ¼ 29, 66%). The SNAs that did recover their shape had mean
apparent viscosity of 88.35 (SE 10.42) Pas, cortical tension of 11.07
(SE 4.98) 10-3 N/m, dissipation ratio of 1.47 (SE 0.22) and critical
pressure of 800.09 (SE 148.72) Pa.
Conclusion: 34% of SNAs behaved as Newtonian liquid droplets, deforming
into the pipette then regaining their shape when the pressure was
released. The force required to deform the SNAs that behaved as Newtonian droplets was less than the pressure that would induce damage to
a pulmonary capillary. The ability to deform and recover their shape could
explain how some SNAs pass through the maternal pulmonary vessels to
enter the peripheral circulation.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A123

P2.89

P2.90

WHAT PERCENTAGE OF THE VILLOUS SURFACE IS REALLY
COVERED WITH CYTOTROPHOBLASTS IN THE FULL-TERM
PLACENTA?

CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID STIMULATES EXPRESSION OF
ANGIOPOETIN LIKE-4 (ANGPTL4) IN THE PLACENTAL
EXTRAVILLOUS TROPHOBLAST CELLS

Ayano Tatsuzuki, Shunichi Morikawa, Taichi Ezaki
Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, Japan

Sanjay Basak1,2, Asim K. Duttaroy1
1
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, India

Objectives: As a feto-maternal interface, the thickness of trophoblast
layers has signiﬁcant inﬂuence over molecular exchange and the barrier
function of placentas. It has been long accepted that the cytotrophoblast
(CT) layer either becomes interrupted or disappears during the course of
gestation. General textbooks describe that the ratio of villous surface
covered by CT is less than 27.5%. In 2007, however, there was a report that
CT cells occupy 80% of villous surface at term, using a cell membrane
marker of villous CT; HAI-1 (Hepatocyte Growth Factor Activator Inhibitor
Type 1). Contrarily, Jones et al. (2008) reported that the term CT coverage
ratio was only 44%, using electron microscopy. In this study, we reappraised the distribution of CT in the full-term human placental villi by
immunohistochemistry.
Methods: Nine normal human placentas were obtained according to
a protocol approved by the Ethical Committee of Tokyo Women’s Medical
University. They were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde and frozen in liquid
nitrogen. Cryosections were made and stained immunohistochemically
with antibodies against various markers including HAI-1.
Results: The confocal laser scanning microscopic observations of thin
sections revealed the distinct continuity of HAI-1 positive area immediately on the basement membranes surrounding villous core. This was also
conﬁrmed on EPON embedded semithin sections. In three dimensional
examinations of thick sections, CTs had prominent and sometimes long
processes, and this apparent CT coverage ratio at term villous surface was
about 45%.
Conclusion: The discrepancy in ratios between HAI-1 positive areas and
CT coverage led us to further investigate to elucidate the HAI-1 positive
structures in non-CT areas at the electron microscopic level.

Objective: Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) concentration in human body is
0.1% of the total fatty acid composition however its roles in feto-placental
growth and development are not well known. We therefore examined
the effects of two CLA isomers (cis-9, trans-11-CLA (c9t11)-CLA and trans-10
cis-12 CLA (t10c12)-CLA) on angiogenic factors such as VEGF, ANGPTL4,
relevant lipid metabolic genes, and tube formation (as a measure of
angiogenesis) in ﬁrst trimester placental trophoblast cells, HTR-8/SVneo.
Methods: HTR-8/SVneo cells were incubated with CLA isomers for 24h and
then expression of genes involved in angiogenesis, lipid metabolism and
transport was investigated. In addition, their effect on tube formation (as
a measure of angiogenesis) was examined. The mRNA expression was
analyzed using quantitative real-time RT-PCR (Applied Biosystems). Fold
change gene expression was calculated according to the DDCt method.
Tube formation in these cells was measured.
Results: c9t11-CLA stimulated the expression of mRNA and protein of
ANGPTL4 accompanied with increased tube formation in HTR-8/SVneo
cells whereas trans-10 cis-12 (t10c12)-CLA had no such effects. c9t11-CLA
however did not stimulate expression of VEGF in these cells. Silencing
ANGPTL4 in these cells signiﬁcantly reduced the stimulatory effect of
c9t11-CLA on tube formation, indicating that involvement of ANGPTL4. In
addition, c9t11-CLA altered mRNA expression of several angiogenesis
modulating factors such as fatty acid binding protein-4(FABP4), FABP3,
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and adipose differentiation-related protein
(ADRP) in HTR-8/SVneo cells. c9t11-CLA also induced the uptake of docosahexaenoic acid,22:6n-3 (DHA), a stimulator of tube formation in these
cells. Triacsin C, an acylCoA synthetase inhibitor, attenuated 9c11t-CLA
induced DHA uptake, tube formation and cellular proliferation in
HTR8/SVneo cells.
Conclusion: c9t11-CLA isomer may help in early placentation processes via
increased expression of ANGPTL4 and other modulating factors such as
FABP4, FABP3, COX-2 and ADRP with concomitant increase in the uptake of
DHA in these cells.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A124

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.91

P2.92

PREPARATION METHOD FOR ESSENCE EXTRACTED FROM PIG
PLACENTA

EFFECT OF ADENOVIRAL-MEDIATED IGF-1 ON HUMAN
PLACENTA MICROVASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL CELLS

Sei-ichi Manabe1, Toyomitsu Itai1, Satoru Takeshita1, Tak Tanikawa1, Kyuichi Sawatani3
1
Sepa-Sigma. Inc., Kitakyusyu, Fukuoka, Japan, 2Hokkaido Placenta Pharmacy Co., Ltd, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan

Kicheol Kil1,2, Mournira Habli1, Youngnam Kim1, Stephanie Lang1, Charles
Klanke1, Sundeep Keswani1, Foong-Yen Lim1, Timothy Crombleholme1,3,
Helen Jones1
1
Center for Molecular Fetal Therapy, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 3Children’s
Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA

Objectives: We intend to verify the applicability of the Sepa-sigma’s pore
diffusion technology to purify the extract essence from pig placenta while
removing bacteria to the level of LTVS6, and to conﬁrm the product
contain the physiological active components such as ILs, TNF, EGF, FGF and
other proteins without loss of their activity. METHODS,
The cryo-placenta of pig was prepared through the rapid refrigeration to
-60 C. After a cut-trimming the cryo., the cells in the cryo. Were destroyed
by the repetition of melt-freeze. The drip components of the cell were
pre-puriﬁed using a centrifuge. The solution part was connected with the
pore diffusion instrument installed with the regenerated cellulose
membrane.
Results: The molecules with less than 30 million of molecular weight
could pass through the membrane having the mean pore size between 10
nm and 500 nm. The diffusion coefﬁcient decreased with an increase in
their molecular weight. The plugging phenomena did not occur. As for pig
placenta drip, the membrane having mean pore size of 500 nm gave the
solution free from germs indicating the removing level of LRV＞6. the
treating speed was 5 little/㎡hr and the plugging appeared slightly after
the stationary state. The solution showed the high level of bio-active
concentration such as IL-1 of 80 pg/ml, IL-10 of 200 pg/ml, TNFa of 70
pg/ml, EFG of 70 pg/ml and FGF-2 of 1200 pg/ml.
Conclusion: We developed the new technology Sepa-Sigma’s pore diffusion system of puriﬁcation of the extract essence from pig placenta while
removing bacteria to the level of LRV＞6. The extract essence contained
most of components in the extra- and intra-cellular liquid without loss of
their activation.

Objectives: Insulin-like growth factor axis including IGF-1 has an important role in feto-placental growth and development throughout gestation.
Recent studies demonstrated that adenoviral-mediated-IGF-1(Ad-hIGF-1)
signiﬁcantly increased placenta growth1 and altered placental labyrinth
volume and fetal capillary density. We hypothesized that Ad-hIGF-1
treatment may promote the proliferation of human placenta microvascular endothelial cells (HPMVECs) and prevent the apoptosis of
HPMVECs.
Methods: We isolated HPMVECs and cultured in vitro to investigate the
direct effect of Ad-hIGF-1 on HPMVECs. Using a novel HPMVECs co-culture
system with BeWo cells, we investigated the indirect effect of Ad-hIGF-1
on HPMVECs. Ad-hIGF-1 treated BeWo cells were seeded with nontreated HPMVECs, and non-treated BeWo cells were treated with
Ad-hIGF-1 treated HPMVECs. Crystal violet assay and immunocytochemistry study were performed to examine the proliferation(Ki67) and
apoptosis(caspase-3) of HPMVECs. Statistical analyses were performed
with student’s t-test. P values <0.05 were considered statistically
signiﬁcant.
Results: Direct Ad-hIGF-1 treatment on HPMVECs signiﬁcantly increased
the proliferation of HPMVECs(N¼4, p<0.001) and the apoptosis of
HPMVECs was reduced(N¼4, p<0.001). The proliferation of HPMVECs
increased after Ad-hIGF-1 treated BeWo cells were seeded with nontreated HPMVECs, whereas apoptosis was decreased. When Ad-hIGF-1
treated HPMVECs were seeded with untreated BeWo cells, proliferation
in BeWo cells was increased and apoptosis was decreased. Direct Ad-hIGF1 treatment to HPMVEC showed more effect than following indirect with
BeWo cells. Both direct and indirect Ad-hIGF-1 treatments result in same
effect on proliferation and apoptosis of BeWo cells.
Conclusion: Direct Ad-hIGF-1 treatment may enhance human placental
microvascular endothelial cells growth more effectively than via treatment
of the trophoblast.

Reference:
1. Katz AB, et al. Placental gene transfer: transgene screening in
mice for trophic effects on the placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2009 Nov;201(5):499.e1-8.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.93

P2.94

A MATERNAL LIPID AND CHOLESTEROL-ENRICHED DIET
DISRUPTS FETAL DEVELOPMENT AND PLACENTAL FUNCTION
IN A RABBIT MODEL

ALTERED ENDOTHELIAL FUNCTION ASSOCIATED WITH
GESTATIONAL DIABETES BEGINS IN UTERO

A. Tarrade1,2, M.C. Aubrière1,2, O. Morel1,2, M. Guillomot1,2, N. Charpentier1,2, M. Dahirel1, J. Bertrand-Michel2, P. Chavatte-Palmer1
1
INRA-ENVA UMR1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, Jouyen-Josas, France, 2Inserm / Université Paul Sabatier UMR 1048/ I2MC,
Toulouse, France
Objectives: We have shown that maternal administration of a lipid (8%)
and cholesterol (0.2%) enriched diet (HH diet) in a rabbit model leads to
IUGR and increased offspring susceptibility to excess body fat, overweight
and hypertension once adults. To examine the link between the fetal
development and metabolic consequences in later life, placental development has been explored.
Methods: Female rabbits were fed with a control (C) or HH diet from 10
weeks of age and throughout gestation. At 28 days of gestation, dams were
anesthetized and a laparotomy was performed to collect placenta and
plasma.
Results: Fetal weight in HH group was signiﬁcantly reduced compared to
C. Total cholesterol and triglycerides concentrations in HH fetuses were
signiﬁcantly increased by 1.2- and 2.3-fold respectively, compared to C.
The structural analysis of HH placentas revealed an abnormal accumulation of light vesicles, identiﬁed as lipid droplets in the trophoblast layer.
Total content of cholesterol esters was also signiﬁcantly increased in HH
placentas. The expression of genes implicated in placental growth,
vascularization and nutrient transfer has been studied. HH placentas were
characterized by a signiﬁcantly decrease in LDL-receptor, CD36, LXR-alpha,
ABC-G1 and SLC38A1 transcripts. The down-regulation of LXR-alpha mRNA
was correlated with a decrease in protein expression.
Conclusion: These data demonstrate that maternal HH diet reduced
cholesterol transport through the placenta as evidenced by placental gene
expression and cholesterol esters accumulation. In contrast, fatty acids
transport was not regulated, which could explain the excess of body fat in
adults.

A125

Silvija Cvitic1, Lavinia Gordon2, Ursula Hiden1, Luciana Lassance1, Richard
Saffery2, Gernot Desoye1
1
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia
Objectives: The ‘Developmental Origin of Health and Disease’ paradigm
proposes environmental factors in pregnancy act in utero to program the
risk for adverse health outcomes. Despite its short duration, gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM) has long term consequences for the offspring and
confers an increased risk for endothelial dysfunction.
We hypothesized that primary human arterial endothelial cells (AEC)
isolated from term placentas after healthy pregnancies (normal AEC) and
pregnancies complicated with GDM (diabetic AEC) would differ in their
intrinsic biological program. We focused on proliferation and angiogenesis
as key endothelial processes.
Methods: Normal and diabetic AEC were cultured for 24, 48 and 96h.
Viable and dead cells were counted to determine proliferation. In vitro
angiogenesis (2-D network formation) was studied in media containing 2%
normal or diabetic cord blood serum (CBS). The global DNA methylation
proﬁle was determined by 450k methylation arrays.
Results: Diabetic AEC proliferated less (ANOVA p<0.003) with 3610%
fewer viable and 338% fewer dead cells after 96h culture than normal
AEC. In the presence of normal CBS total tube length (þ 4510%), number
of branching points (þ 31128%) and number of meshes (þ 16350%)
were increased in diabetic vs. normal AEC (ANOVA p<0.001). Diabetic CBS
did not inﬂuence network formation neither in normal nor diabetic AEC.
Thus the difference in proliferation and tube formation is the result of an
intrinsic cell program. Principal component analysis revealed differences
in the global methylation pattern between normal and diabetic AEC.
Conclusion: The altered proliferation and network formation potential of
diabetic placental AEC even when cultured under identical conditions as
normal AEC argues for changes in the cells, which are independent of the
acute environmental conditions. These changes appear to reﬂect an
intrinsic program to which epigenetic modiﬁcations contribute. Thus
GDM-associated programming of endothelial cells of the offspring may
begin in utero.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A126

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.95

P2.96

PATHOLOGICAL CHANGES IN ABORTED TISSUE FROM RSA
(RECURRENT SPONTANEOUS ABORTION) PATIENTS WITH
ANTI-PHOSPHOLIPID ANTIBODIES INDUCED BY PATERNAL
LYMPHOCYTES IMMUNIZATION

EFFECTS OF ANTI b2-GPI ANTIBODIES ON CYTOKINE
PRODUCTION IN NORMAL TROPHOBLAST CELLS

Mamiko Dobashi, Rie Kawaguchi, Tadao Tanaka, Aikou Okamoto
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Jikei University, School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
Introduction: The therapy with paternal lymphocytes for immunization of
patients with recurrent spontaneous abortion (RSA) has been reported to
stimulate maternal immune-response and conduct blocking-antibodies,
therefore contribute to the maintenance of pregnancy. However, this
treatment may induce auto-antibodies including anti-phospholipid antibodies (aPLs), and these antibodies may be unfavorable for pregnancy,
a topic not elucidated so far.
Materials and Methods: 71 patients with RSA of unknown causes with
negative auto-antibodies including aPLs were immunized with paternal
lymphocytes at the Jikei University Hospital from April 2003 to December
2011. APLs were analyzed after treatment. The therapeutic outcome was
compared between aPLs-induced patients (PC group) and non-induced
patients (NC group). We investigated pathological changes in aborted
tissues from patients with miscarriage after treatment.
Results: From 71 patients, 15 showed aPLs induction (PC group, 21.1%),
while 56 patients remained non-induced (NC group, 78.9%). In the PC
group anti-cardiolipin IgG antibodies were observed in 14 cases. The ratio
of a successful pregnancy was 7/11 (63.6%) in the PC group and 27/40
(67.5%) in the NC group. In the PC group, anti-coagulant therapy was
introduced to 7 cases, and 6 of them (85.7%) successfully maintained
pregnancy, while in 4 cases without this therapy, only 1 successfully
maintained pregnancy (25%).
Investigation of pathological changes in aborted tissues with normal
karyotype revealed characteristic changes in 4/7 cases in patients with
aPLs, while no changes were observed in patients without aPLs (0/6).
Changes included abortive vessels, pink-amorphous depositions and
lymphocytes inﬁltrations.
Conclusion: After immunization with paternal lymphocytes it is recommended to examine for possible induction of aPLs. A subsequent anticoagulant therapy may prevent abortion even under these adverse
conditions.

Hiromitsu Azuma, Yusuke Kobayashi, Akikazu Nakamura, Go Ichikawa,
Takayuki Murase, Fumihisa Chishima, Manami Suzuki, Tatsuo Yamamoto
Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
Objectives: The antib2-GPI antibody was detected in recurrent fetal loss
with strong pathogenic activity. The pathogenic activities of antiphospholipid antibodies consist of thrombosis and trophoblastic damage.
The anti b2-GPI antibody increases NFkB via TLR-4 on the endothelial cells.
In order to investigate the effects of anti b2-GPI antibody for the placenta,
the effects of anti b2-GPI antibody on the cytokine production in ﬁrst
trimester trophoblast cells were evaluated.
Methods: The ﬁrst trimester trophoblast cells were cultured in 24-well
tissue culture plate.
The cells after incubation with puriﬁed b2-GPI were cultured with the IgGs
taken from anti b2-GPI antibody positive and negative serum.
Cytokines such as IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma and
GM-CSF in cultured supernatant were measured by using the suspension
array system Bio-PlexÒ (BIO-RAD) and IL-17 and IL-23 were measured by
using ELISA.
Results: Cytokine production such as IL-6 and IL-8 by anti b2-GPI antibody
positive IgG increased much more than that by negative IgG in the ﬁrst
trimester trophoblast cells.
Conclusion: We suspect that the anti b2-GPI antibodies may bind to the
b2-GPI/phosphatidylserine complex on the surface of ﬁrst trimester
trophoblast cells and that the anti b2-GPI antibodies may increase the
cytokine production in these cells.
The increased cytokine production by anti b2-GPI antibody may play a role
of increased inﬂammatory response in placenta.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.97

P2.98

HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN 70 OF PLACENTA AND SERUM BETWEEN
PREECLAMPTIC PATIENTS AND NORMOTENSIVE PREGNANT
WOMEN

AMNIOTIC LAMELLAR BODY COUNTS AND CONGENITAL
DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA IN HUMANS AND RATS

Suk-Young Kim, Joo-Hwan Kim, Dul-Rae Min, Han-Na Park, Ji-Sun Surh,
Soon-Pyo Lee
Dept. Of Obstetrics and Gynecology Gachon University, Gil Hospital,
Incheon, Republic of Korea
Objective: The purpose of this study was to measure placental and serum
protein 70 in mothers with preeclampsia and to evaluate whether it can be
applied as an useful predictor for preeclampsia.
Methods: In a matched pair study, placental and serum levels of hsp70
were measured in 36 patients with mild and severe preeclampsia, and in
36 normotensive controls.
After obtaining informed consent, placental and serum samples were
collected from all participants to measure hsp70 levels. The levels of
placental hsp70 were measured using Western blotting and serum hsp70
were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Placental
hsp70 were stained with Immunohistochemistry.
Results: Measurement of placental and serum hsp70 levels showed
statistically higher values among preeclamptic patients compared to
control groups. The placental hsp70 levels in normotensive pregnant
women and preeclamptic patients were 0.877 and 5.012 volume intensity
mm2 (p¼0.000). And the serum hsp70 levels in normotensive pregnant
women and preeclamptic patients were 2.161 and 4.272 ng/mL (p¼0.057)
respectively. The difference of hsp70 on birth before and after 34 weeks in
preeclampsia is not signiﬁcant. Mild and sever preeclampsia are not
signiﬁcant. There are not signiﬁcant in preeclampsia with IUGR or without
IUGR, either. But if we had more samples, the placental hsp70 levels could
be signiﬁcant values in preeclamptic patients between without IUGR and
with IUGR.
There are not signiﬁcant in correlation coefﬁcients between clinical characteristics and laboratory parameters of normotensive pregnant women
and preeclamptic patients. There are signiﬁcant in Immunohistochemistry
staining for placental hsp70 in normotensive pregnant women and
preeclamptic patients.
Conclusion: Placental hsp70 levels are elevated in pre-eclamptic women
and but, serum hsp70 levels are not signiﬁcant. However, further studies
are needed to understand the underlying mechanism for this elevation in
the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.

A127

Yuriko Watanabe, Hiroyuki Tsuda, Li Hua, Satoshi Matsukawa, Tomoko
Nakano, Yukio Mano, Seiji Sumigama, Tomomi Kotani, Fumitaka Kikkawa
Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya city, Japan
Objectives: We examined the extent of fetal lung hypoplasia and lung
maturation using amniotic lamellar body count (LBC) in congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH).
Methods: We obtained 30 amniotic ﬂuid samples at Cesarean section in
human CDH. In normal and nitrofen-induced CDH rat, we collected
amniotic ﬂuid and lung tissue of the newborn at E21.
Results: In human CDH, LBC was signiﬁcantly higher in alive group than in
death group (P < .01). In rat, LBC was signiﬁcantly higher in controls than in
CDH (P < .01). Then, LBC per unit lung weight in controls was similar to
that in CDH (P ¼ .544) and the expression of ABCA3 was not signiﬁcantly
different in lung tissue (P ¼ .551).
Conclusion: LBC can be a useful predictor for hypoplastic lung in human
CDH after 35 weeks. Fetal lung maturation does not delay in CDH
comparing with controls from human and rat CDH.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A128

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.99

P2.100

WHOLE GENOME AMPLIFICATION OF SYNCYTIAL NUCLEAR
AGGREGATE DNA - POTENTIAL FOR MINIMALLY-INVASIVE
PRENATAL DIAGNOSTICS

A CASE REPORT OF PLACENTAL HEMANGIOMA

Olivia Holland, Chrislyn Jeyaprakash, Larry Chamley
The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Objectives: Syncytial nuclear aggregates (SNAs) are clusters of syncytiotrophoblast nuclei shed from the placenta and into the maternal blood,
and are a potential source of fetal/placental DNA for minimally-invasive
prenatal diagnostics. We conducted this investigation to determine if
DNA of sufﬁcient quantity and quality for downstream genetic testing
procedures was present in SNAs.
Methods: Four ﬁrst trimester placentae (gestations 12.2, 11.0, 9.2 and 8.4
weeks) were cultured and SNAs harvested using our published in vitro
model. Nine SNAs from each placenta were individually collected with
micromanipulators and subjected to whole genome ampliﬁcation (n ¼ 36
SNA). Post-ampliﬁcation double stranded DNA quantity was measured
with a ﬂuorometer, and the ampliﬁcation product was subjected to gel
electrophoresis to determine DNA quality.
Results: We found a mean of 135 (SE 120) ng/mL of DNA from single SNAs,
with a range from none to a maximum of 372 ng/mL per SNA. Qualitative
variation in DNA degradation (as measured by gel electrophoresis) was
also observed between individual SNAs. Twenty-ﬁve SNA (69%) were
considered to have DNA of sufﬁcient quality and quantity for downstream
applications (DNA quantity above 50 ng/mL and fragments over 1,000 base
pairs), with 13 of the 25 having DNA of high quality (DNA quantity above
150 ng/mL and fragments over 2,000 base pairs).
Conclusion: These results show that a high proportion of SNAs could be
a source of fetal genetic material to be applied in genetic procedures such
as DNA microarray, digital PCR or massive parallel sequencing; and suggest
that SNAs have potential for use in minimally-invasive prenatal diagnostics
based on a maternal blood sample.

Ryoko Oomura, Osamu Akutatagawa, Ei Hasegawa, Tomomi Iwasa, Reiko
kato, Fumitoshi Terauchi, Keiichi Isaka
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tokyo Medical University,
Tokyo, Japan
Placental hemangioma is observed in approximately 1 % of histopathologically examined placentas, but prenatal diagnosis via imaging is
extremely rare. When the diameter of the tumor is 5 cm or more, it is
known to cause complications including threatened premature labor due
to polyhydramnios, or fetal cardiac failure - or hydrops fetalis - due to
intratumoral shunting. This report describes a case of suspected placental
hemangioma at 30 weeks gestation, for which a Cesarean section was
performed at 37 weeks due to polyhydramnios. This procedure resulted in
the birth of a healthy infant.
The patient was a 35-year-old pregnant woman with no notable family or
previous medical history.
A placental tumor was suspected during the prenatal examination at 30weeks and the patient was referred to our hospital for consultation.
Ultrasound examination at our hospital revealed a solid tumor with
a diameter exceeding 6 cm peripheral to the normal fetus which included
the umbilical cord. Color Doppler revealed abundant internal blood ﬂow.
Plain magnetic resonance imaging also suggested placental hemangioma.
Due to an amniotic ﬂuid index of 32cm, polyhydramnios was suspected.
While no subsequent abnormal signs were observed in the fetus or the
placenta, the patient was admitted due to advancing polyhydramnios.
Following admission, the patient was administered ritodrine hydrochloride, underwent weekly amniocentesis and was put under observation as
she showed signs of a threatened premature labor.
Breech presentation led to the decision to deliver via Cesarean section at
37 weeks.
The infant was a female weighing 2746 g and with no apparent
abnormalities.
A histopathological examination of the expelled placenta resulted in
diagnosis of a capillary angioma.
As placental hemangioma is by no means a rare disease, it is essential to
pay sufﬁcient attention to the shape of the placenta from the early stages of
pregnancy.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A129

P2.101

P2.102

EMBRYO EUTHANASIA AND AMNIOTIC FLUID LEAKAGE
INDUCES UNK CELLS CYTOTOXIC ACTIVITY

A HIGH THROUGHPUT IN VITRO MODEL OF HUMAN EMBRYO
ATTACHMENT

Aureo Yamada, Stephanie S M Federighe, Aline Dalmorin, Maira M Lira,
Patricia D A Lima
University of Campinas, Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil

Huiting Ho1,2, Harmeet Singh1, Guiying Nie1
1
Prince Henry’s Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Vic, Australia,
2
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University,
Melbourne, Vic, Australia

Objectives: Human and mice uNK cells express immunoglobulin-like
receptor (KIR-human and Ly49-mouse) and c-lectin-like receptor (NKG2human and mouse) activating receptors with high afﬁnity to MHC-I
molecules and also cytoplasmic granules containing cytolytic proteins
that predict their innate immune type cytotoxic response. The present
work used the mouse in utero-embryo euthanasia and intra-uterine
amniotic ﬂuid inoculation to evaluate the triggering of uNK cell cytotoxic
activity.
Methods: Twenty percent of embryos in the pregnant mice uteri at
gestational days (gd) 9 and 12 were surgically euthanized and after 0.5, 1
and 6hr, uterine samples from both surgical embryo euthanized (SEE) and
non-manipulated were collected for morphological and immunocytochemical analysis. Tissue homogenates from embryo tissue free mesometrium were collected and processed for protein and RNA extractions.
Amniotic ﬂuid (AF) were collected from normal embryo developing sites at
gd12 and inoculated (10mL) into the inter-implantation sites of pregnant
uterus at gd 9 and12 and the uterine samples collected in the same way of
SEE.
Results: Both SEE and non-manipulated sites showed decreasing of uNK
cell perforin, granzymeA contents by immunostain, as soon as 30 min after
SEE with loosing of secretory-lysosome granules contents at ultrastructural analysis, suggesting the releasing of cytolytic contents from the
granules. Similar time-dependent uNK cell morphological changes and
granule contents loosing were conﬁrmed after AF inoculation conﬁrming
AF soluble contents, rather than the embryo death or trophoblast driven
factors triggers the uNK cell. PCR analysis showed increasing of TNFa, IFNg
and IL18 pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, and perforin and granzymeA cytolytic proteins transcripts, all of them produced by uNK cells.
Conclusions: Taken all together, uNK cell is a sensitive sentinel of
maternal-fetal interface ready responsive cytotoxic effectors cells that can
be triggered in abnormal pregnancy. Which component from the AF is
capable to stimulate such a response of uNK cells is the next challenge.

Objectives: Currently used in vitro models of human embryo attachment
involve co-culture of a monolayer of human endometrial epithelial cells
(to mimic the uterine epithelium) and trophoblast spheroids (to mimic
blastocysts). However, these are technically demanding and time
consuming as spheroids are selected microscopically and their attachment
is quantiﬁed by manual counting. These assays are also highly variable and
not suitable for high throughput studies. The aim of this study was to
establish a high throughput attachment assay that is simple and can be
performed in most laboratories.
Methods: We made the following signiﬁcant modiﬁcations to the existing
model: label trophoblast spheroids with green ﬂuorescence, select
spheroids of size similar to implanting blastocysts using cell strainers, and
assess spheroid attachment using an automated microplate reader.
Results: Human trophoblast BeWo spheroids were prepared by rocking
cell suspension for 24h. They were then labeled with Calcein and ﬁltered
sequentially through cell strainers (100 um and 70 um) to select spheroids
with sizes similar to implanting human blastocysts. The uniformly-sized
and ﬂuorescently-labeled spheroids were then incubated with a monolayer of endometrial epithelial cells. The ﬂuorescence signals from spheroids that were initially seeded and from those that attached following the
incubation were quantiﬁed respectively by a microplate reader, and the
percentage of attachment was calculated. The assay was validated by
testing human endometrial epithelial cells of different receptivity
(receptive: RL95-2; nonreceptive: AN3-CA), and by applying a known
attachment inhibitor (to RL95-2) or enhancer (to AN3-CA). Our results
demonstrate that this high throughput assay is efﬁcient and reproducible
to assess attachment under different experimental conditions.
Conclusion: We describe a new and high throughput assay for the study of
human embryo attachment. This assay will also permit high throughput
screening of factors/drugs affecting embryo attachment.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A130

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.103

P2.104

EVTS STIMULATE AND ENHANCE THE DECIDUALIZATION OF
HUMAN ENDOMETRIAL STROMAL CELLS

PC6 IS CRITICAL FOR ENDOMETRIAL RECEPTIVITY IN WOMEN:
MODULATING SCAFFOLDING PROTEINS AND
MEMBRANE-CYTOSKELETAL INTERACTIONS

Ellen Menkhorst, Evdokia Dimitriadis
Prince Henry’s Institute, Melbourne, Australia
Inadequate implantation and placentation during the establishment of
pregnancy is thought to lead to obstetric complications. To create the
placental blood supply, extravillous trophoblast (EVT) invade through the
decidua to engraft and remodel uterine spiral arteries. Impaired decidualization is associated with recurrent miscarriage, preeclampsia and
placenta accrete.
Objectives: To determine whether EVT secreted factors induce or enhance
human endometrial stromal cell (HESC) decidualization.
Methods: Isolated primary 1st trimester EVT (pooled n¼5), HTR8SVneo
(HTR8, EVT cell line) and HEK293 (control cell line) cells were cultured on
growth-factor reduced matrigel. Conditioned media (CM) from the 3
groups was collected every 24h. Isolated human endometrial stromal cells
were decidualized by treatment with estradiol (E, 5x10-9M), or
Eþmedroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA, 5x10-8M) for 7 days after which
CM from either of the 3 groups was added for a further 6 days (n¼3).
Prolactin secretion (decidualization marker) by HESC was measured every
48h. EVT CM was assayed for progesterone and used for proteomic
analysis.
Results: HESCs treated with E alone, or EþHTR8 or HEK293 CM did not
secrete detectable levels of prolactin. HESC treated with EVT CM induced
prolactin secretion (0.037þ0.002 mIU/mg) demonstrating it stimulated
decidualization. By comparison HESC treated with EþMPA (decidualization control) secreted prolactin at 0.026þ0.004mIU/mg. HESC treated
with EVT CM and EþMPA enhanced prolactin secretion 3-fold compared
to decidualization control EþMPA alone and HEK293þEþMPA:
(EVTþEþMPA: 0.09þ0.02 vs EþMPA: 0.026þ0.004 mIU/mg; vs HEK293
0.028þ0.019mIU/mg, p<0.05) and 2-fold compared to HTR8
(0.042þ0.018mIU/mg, p<0.05). EVTs secreted low levels of progesterone.
Proteomics analysis identiﬁed 10 factors secreted by EVTs which have
previously been associated with decidualization.
Conclusion: The data demonstrated that EVT secreted factors induced and
enhanced decidualization and suggested EVT secreted factors that synergised with progesterone to promote decidualization. We identiﬁed EVT
proteins that are associated with decidualization and studies are
underway to investigate their functional role.

Sophea Heng1, Ying Li1, Sarah Paule1, Harmeet Singh1, Carlos Simon2, Luk
Rombauts3, Guiying Nie1
1
Prince Henry’s Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Vic, Australia,
2
Fundación IVI, Instituto Universitario IVI, Universidad de Valencia,
Valencia, Spain, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Monash
University, Melbourne, Vic, Australia
Objectives: Establishment of endometrial receptivity involves dramatic
structural changes in the plasma membrane and cytoskeleton. However,
the molecular regulations governing fundamental cellular changes for
receptivity are not well understood. Proprotein convertase 5/6 (PC6),
a serine protease of the proprotein convertase (PC) family, is up-regulated
in the human endometrium speciﬁcally at the time of receptivity. The
current study aimed to address the importance and mechanisms of PC6
action in regulating endometrial receptivity in women.
Methods: Endometrial epithelial PC6 levels were determined by immunohistochemistry in fertile and infertile women. An ex vivo model of
embryo attachment, in combination with siRNA knockdown, was applied
to establish the importance of PC6 in receptivity. Proteomics was used to
identify the mechanisms of PC6 action.
Results: PC6 was dys-regulated in the endometrial epithelium during the
window of implantation in infertile women of three demographically
different cohorts. The critical role of PC6 in receptivity was evidenced by
a signiﬁcant reduction in mouse blastocyst attachment of endometrial
epithelial cells following PC6 knockdown by siRNA. Using a proteomic
approach, we discovered that PC6 cleaved the key scaffolding protein
EBP50. This cleavage profoundly affected the cytoskeleton-membrane
interactions causing signiﬁcant cytoskeletal reorganization: following
PC6 cleavage, EBP50 dissociates from its binding protein ezrin (a key
protein bridging actin ﬁlaments and plasma membrane), triggering
membrane de-localization of EBP50/ezrin and cytoskeleton-membrane
dissociation. We further validated this novel PC6 regulation of endometrial receptivity in fertile vs infertile women.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrates that PC6 plays a critical role for
embryo implantation in women. PC6 cleaves a key scaffolding protein
EBP50 thereby regulating fundamental cellular remodelling processes
required for receptivity. Our discovery of PC6 cleavage of EBP50 to
profoundly regulate membrane-cytoskeletal reorganization, greatly
extends the current knowledge and provides substantial new mechanistic
insight into the ﬁelds of reproduction, basic cellular biology and PC
biochemistry.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A131

P2.105

P2.106

THE ROLE OF CAMP-MEDIATED EPAC SIGNALLING PATHWAY IN
DECIDUALIZATION OF HUMAN ENDOMETRIAL STROMAL CELLS

A CASE OF WOLF-HIRSCHHORN SYNDROME PRENATALLY
CONFIRMED BY FLUORESCENCE IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION

Kazuya Kusama1, Mikihiro Yoshie1, Kazuhiro Tamura1, Takahiro
Nakayama1, Hanako Bai2, Toshihiro Sakurai2, Kazuhiko Imakawa2, Hirotaka
Nishi3, Keiichi Isaka3, Takeshi Nagai4, Toshitaka Nagao4, Masahiko Kutsukake1, Eiichi Tachikawa1
1
Department of Endocrine Pharmacology, Tokyo University of Pharmacy
and Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan, 2Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate
School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan, 4Department of Anatomic Pathology, Tokyo Medical
University, Tokyo, Japan

Shiori Minakawa, Norio Miharu, Takayo Syoji, Yasuko Yamamoto, Aya
Toyohuku, Yasutaka Hasegawa
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chuden Hospial, Hiroshima,
Japan

Objectives: Decidualization of human endometrial stromal cells (ESCs) is
accompanied by production of decidual markers, IGF binding protein-1
(IGFBP-1) and prolactin (PRL) as well as morphological changes. The
protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated cAMP signalling is well known to be
crucial for decidualization. However, the involvement of Exchange protein
directly activated cAMP (Epac)-mediated cAMP signalling in decidualization has not been so far elucidated. We examined here the spatiotemporal
expression of Epac in endometrium during the menstrual cycle and the
role of Epac in decidualization of ESCs.
Methods: Epac1 and Epac2 expressions in human endometrium were
examined by immunohistochemistry. Cultured ESCs were treated
with Epac-selective agonist (8-CPT-2-OMe-cAMP:CPT) in the presence of
PKA-selective agonist (N6-Phe-cAMP:Phe) or both progesterone and
estradiol (P4/E2). The expression of IGFBP-1 or PRL was analyzed by realtime RT-PCR and ELISA. The activation of Rap1, a putative mediator of Epac
signalling, were detected by pull-down assay. Effects of siRNA-based
knockdown of Epac1, Epac2 or Rap1 on decidualization were examined.
Results: Epac1 and Epac2 were expressed in glandular epithelium and
stroma in the endometrium of the proliferative and secretory phases. CPT
alone affected neither IGFBP-1 nor PRL expression in ESCs. However, CPT
enhanced Phe-induced IGFBP-1 or PRL expression. CPT activated Rap1 in
Phe-treated decidualizing ESCs. Knocking down Epac1, Epac2 or Rap1
inhibited the cAMP analog-induced IGFBP-1 and PRL expressions.
Furthermore, CPT stimulated P4/E2-induced IGFBP-1 expression and
increased the number of large- and round-shaped ESCs, whereas the
knockdown of Epac1, Epac2 or Rap1 repressed these changes.
Conclusion: These results suggest that Epac/Rap1 signalling may be
involved in ovarian steroids-induced decidualization of endometrial
stromal cells in human endometrium.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is deﬁned by a collection of core
characteristics that include mental retardation, epilepsy, growth delay, and
craniofacial dysgenesis. The disorder is caused by a hemizygous deletion of
the short arm of chromosome 4, called the WHS critical region (WHSC).
And the WHSC1 gene is located in this region, and its loss is believed to be
responsible for a number of WHS characteristics.
Case Report: A 36-year-old gravida ﬁve, para two woman was referred to
the hospital at 11 weeks of gestation for aminocentesis because of nuchal
translucency thickness of 3.9mm. She has already had three times abortions.
Amniocentesis was performed at 17 weeks of gestation, and cytogenetic
studies showed that the fetal karyotype was 46,XY,add(4) (p15.2). Furthermore, ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization study was added, and it showed the
deletion of the 4p subtelomeric region(GS-36P21) and WHSC1 region. After
a genetic counseling, the parents decided to terminate the pregnancy. A
256g fetus was delivered with growth delay and its appearance was normal.
Cytogenetic studies were done to examine whether the parents had
a translocation. The maternal karyotype was 46,XX,t(1;4)(p36.3;p15.3).
The paternal karyotype was normal. Thus, we could know that the ﬁnal
fetal karyotype was 46,XY,der(4) t(1;4)(p36.3;p15.3)mat. ish der(4)
t(1;4)(p36.3;p15.3)(GS-36P21-,WHSC1-).
Conclusion: We report a case of WHS that it is prenatally conﬁrmed by
ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization in amniocentesis.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A132

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.107

P2.108

TWO DIFFICULT CASES FOR GENETIC COUNSELING IN
AMNIOCENTESIS

THE ROLE OF PLACENTA PATHOLOGY IN RECURRENT
PREGNANCY LOSSES

Takayo Shoji, Norio Miharu, Shiori Minakawa, Yasuko Yamamoto, Aya
Toyohuku, Yasutaka Hasegawa
Department of obstetrics and gynecology, Chuden Hospital, Hiroshima
city, Japan

Masayoshi Arizawa
Ohtsuka Hospital, Toshimaku, Tokyo, Japan

Case Report: We recently encountered two cases where two different
types of mosaics were found on amniocentesis, causing difﬁculties in
genetic counseling. In a ﬁrst case, the patient was a 38-year-old woman.
Because of advanced maternal age, she underwent an amniocentesis at 16
weeks of gestation. The test revealed mosaic (46,XX/47,XX,þ18). Precisely
described, one of the 3 ﬂasks used for cell culture was rated as showing
level II mosaic (normal karyotype 46,XX, for 21 of the 47 cells, and
karyotype 47,XX,þ18, for 26 cells). Because this result highly probably
represented an artifact, the test was conducted again. In the re-test with in
situ method, all colonies were rated as having normal karyotype. The ﬁnal
judgment on amniocentesis results was normal karyotype 46,XX. In
a second case, the patient was a 41-year-old woman. Because of advanced
maternal age, she underwent an amniocentesis at 16 weeks of gestation.
The test revealed mosaic 45,X/46,XX (a karyotype 45,X, for 15 of the 66
cells, and normal karyotype 46,XX, for 51 cells). In this case, it was
considered that the child’s true karyotype would be 45X, 45,X/46,XX, or
46,XX, and the phenotype would be different by each karyotype. The born
child was 2780g of weights, and the Apgar score was 9, and then, no
abnormality was found at the phenotype. Also, the exam of echocardiography was normal. The result of child’s karyotype test was mosaic
45,X/46,XX (a karyotype 45,X, for 7 of the 20 cells, and normal karyotype
46,XX, for 13 cells).
Conclusion: Each cases, we needed several times of genetic counseling to
get understanding about the results. So, in such mosaic cases, genetic
counseling before and after amniocentesis is quite important.

Purpose: As part of the examination into recurrent pregnancy losses,
a blood test, villous pathologic examination, the examination of the uterus,
of the villous chromosome and of the mother’s and father’s chromosomes
were performed. All testing is important for treatment, but the villi causing
the recurrent pregnancy losses are often found to show abnormality. I
examined the villi in single miscarriage as well as the examination villi in
recurrent pregnancy losses, the villi in both cases determines what kind of
problems there are mostly exist and this information may be able to help in
future clinical treatment.
Method: I performed pathologic studies of the villi in 10 recurrent
pregnancy losses and 30 recent miscarriages.
Results:

1. The placenta villi which showed chromosomal aberration was
large, many had variant forms, was strong and showed
trophoblast islands, so-called dysmature villi. As for the pathologic examination of the miscarriage villi and the recurrent
pregnancy losses, dysmature villi were high rate.
2. There were cases of extensive deposition of ﬁbrin to decidua,
and severe ﬁbrin deposition around villous trophoblast.
3. There were also cases of repeat intrauterine infection.
Discussion: The gene abnormality in the villi as well as chromosome
aberration, led to anomaly, dysmature villi and recurrent pregnancy losses.
Coagulation disorder that was not proved hematologically was found in
the extensive ﬁbrin deposition around the decidua and the villi. In these
cases, anticoagulation therapy helps produce satisfactory outcome. Repeat
intrauterine infection has increased dramatically recently, and the epidemiological investigation will be necessary in future, in order to ﬁnd the
cause of infection.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

A133

P2.109

P2.110

THE LONG NON-CODING RNA ASSOCIATED WITH THE HELLPSYNDROME IS EXPRESSED IN THE EXTRAVILLOUS
TROPHOBLAST AND FUNCTIONS IN THE CELL CYCLE

DIFFUSION-WEIGHTED MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING OF
THE PLACENTA IN PREGNANCIES COMPLICATED BY SMALL
FOR GESTATIONAL AGE OR MORBIDLY ADHERENT PLACENTA

Hari krishna Thulluru, Cees Oudejans, Marie van Dijk
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Frederic Chantraine1, Malek Tebache2, Vicki Passoglou2, Katty Delbecque3,
Michelle Nisolle1
1
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Liège, CHR Citadelle, Liege,
Belgium, 2Radiologie, CHR Citadelle, Belgium, Liege, Belgium, 3Pathology,
University of Liège, CHR Citadelle, Liege, Belgium

Objective: The pregnancy-related HELLP- syndrome leading to Hemolysis,
Elevated Liver enzymes and Low Platelet count is linked to the 12q23
chromosomal region, a gene desert ﬂanked by PMCH and IGF1, both
transcribed from the Crick (-) strand. Initial work in this gene desert
showed Watson (þ) strand-speciﬁc transcription with the 5’end overlapping exon 1 of PMCH, and without open reading frames to form
a protein, supporting the existence of a long non-coding RNA within the
HELLP linkage region.
Methods: To analyze the 3’end of the transcript, RACE (Rapid Ampliﬁcation of cDNA Ends) experiments were carried out on total RNA isolated
from an extravillous trophoblast cell line. The exact location of the ncRNA
transcript within the placenta was determined by Fluorescent in situ
Hybridization (FISH). siRNA-mediated knockdown of the transcript was
performed followed by conﬁrmation using semi-quantitative and quantitative RT-PCR. Samples with conﬁrmed knockdown were subsequently
used in whole genome RNA-sequencing.
Results: The 3’end was found to be located within the 3’UTR of IGF1,
yielding a non-coding RNA with a length of 205kb. FISH experiments
showed nuclear and perinuclear localization within the extravillous
trophoblast cell line. Placental sections showed predominant localization
of the ncRNA transcript within the extravillous trophoblast columns.
Whole genome RNA-sequencing on the siRNA-mediated knockdown
samples has yielded an extensive set of data which, when analyzed by
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), yielded top ranked networks and
functions related to the cell cycle.
Conclusions: The identiﬁed long non-coding RNA associated with the
HELLP syndrome is primarily localized in extravillous trophoblasts. This,
along with IPA data obtained from whole genome RNA sequencing, will be
helpful to further investigate the exact function of the long non-coding
RNA and its dysfunction in the HELLP syndrome.

Objectives: To evaluate diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of the human placenta in normal pregnancies and those complicated
by morbidly adherent placenta (MAP) or small for gestational age (SGA).
Methods: In this prospective observational study, we evaluate 1,5 T fetal
MRI’s. The local ethics committee approved the study. All patients were
recruited from our foetal medicine unit. The apparent diffusion coefﬁcient
(ADC) of the whole placenta was calculated on diffusion-weighted MR
images.
First were elaborated “norm” values in analysing control cases where MRI
was realized in normal growing fetuses presenting an organic malformation like neural-tube defects or others. The placental function was
supposed normal in these cases.
Then the placentas of MAP cases, fulﬁlling the ultrasound criteria’s for
placenta accreta, were analysed.
Finally, placentas of SGA foetuses, were biometries at ultrasound were
below the P10, were studied.
MRI-Data were correlated to the ultrasound and the post-natal ﬁndings.
Results: In total, 48 pregnancies were included. The mean gestational age
at MRI was 30 weeks of amenorrhea (range 18-36) and the mean ADC for
the whole group was 1.9  103 mm2/sec (range 1.0-2.9).
The mean ADC of controls (n¼17) and MAP (n¼5) were with 2.1 and 2.0 
103 mm2/sec in the same range. The SGA group (n¼26) could be divided
in two subgroups (13 with and 13 without placental insufﬁciency, based on
ultrasound, neonatal and pathological information). The mean ADC was
signiﬁcantly different in these two groups (2.1 versus 1.5  103 mm2/sec,
p<0.0001).
Conclusions: SGA related to placental dysfunction is associated in MRI
with restricted diffusion and reduced ADC compared to control or MAP
placentas. Decreased placental ADC might be a sign of altered function in
cases of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) caused by placental
insufﬁciency.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A134

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.111

P2.112

A CASE OF VASA PREVIA (TYPE 2)

CAN ULTRASONOGRAPHIC MEASUREMENT OF THE MAJOR
AXIS OF THE PLACENTA AT 20-21 WEEKS OF , GESTATION
PREDICT FETAL GROWTH RESTRICTION ?

Suguru Nosaka1, Tomohisa Sakashita2, Shintaro Sakate2, Takahiro Nobuzane2, Yoshiki Kudo2
1
Hiroshima prefectural hospital, Hiroshima, Japan, 2Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan
Vasa previa is an uncommon condition in which fetal vessels traverse the
lower uterine segment in advance of the fetal presenting part. There are
the two types of vasa previa; type 1 results from velamentous cord
insertion and type 2 from vessels running between lobes of a bi-lobed or
succenturiate lobed placenta. Since the vessels are not protected by either
the umbilical cord or the placenta, they are prone to be compressed during
labor and may tear as a result of the rupture of the membrane. Because
rupture of vasa previa results in fetal exsanguination, hemorrhagic shock
and death, the prognosis of fetus is poor when vasa previa is not diagnosed
prenatally. We report a case of 32-year-old woman who is diagnosed of
vasa previa (type 2) prenatally. She was referred to our hospital at 30
weeks of pregnancy because she had low-lying placenta and slight vaginal
bleeding was observed. Transabdominal and trasvaginal ultrasound
examination showed a horseshoe-shaped placenta nearly enclosed the
inner cervical os, marginal placental venous sinus and vessels crossing
over the inner cervical os. She was diagnosed as type 2 vasa previa and
admitted to our hospital. Because uterine contraction increased, in spite of
tocolysis, elective cesarean section was performed at 34 weeks of pregnancy. A vertical incision on the uterine body was used in order to avoid
cutting the placenta, vasa previa and fetal vessels. The post operative
examination revealed the horseshoe-shaped placenta and large vessels
running on the extraplacental membrane between the both ends of the
placenta crossing over the internal cervical os. The postpartum course of
her and the infant was uneventful.

Kei Hayata1, Mayuko Sato1, Makoto Nagaji1, Kenji Shimizu1, Reina
Komatsu2, Nobutaka Yoshida2, Yuji Hiramatsu3
1
Tottori Municipal Hospital, Tottori, Japan, 2Hiroshima City Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan, 3Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Science, Okayama, Japan
Objective: Fetal growth depends on the placental size. An abnormally
decreased placental weight has been linked to increased perinatal
complications, including fetal growth restriction (FGR). However, there is
no standardized method for measuring a placenta prenatally using ultrasonography. We herein propose a novel method using two-dimensional
ultrasonography to predict fetal growth restriction from the diameter of
the placenta at 20-21 weeks of gestation.
Methods: We performed a prospective study to measure the placental
diameter in 471 pregnancies at 20-21 weeks of gestation.
Results: The relationship between the placental diameter and the birth
weight was analyzed using a linear regression analysis. There was a direct
correlation (R2¼0.416, P<0.001) between the placental diameter and the
birth weight of the infants. The average placental diameter of LFD cases
(n¼29) was 10.40.6cm, while the average placental diameter of non-LFD
cases (n¼442) was 12.41.0cm. It is therefore possible to predict the FGR
based on the placental diameter at 20-21 weeks of gestation. Using a ROC
curve, the cutoff value for the placental diameter was set at 11.2cm. The
sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the test were 97% and 88%, respectively. The
positive predictive value and negative predictive value of the test were 35%
and 99%, respectively. The risk of the endpoint was signiﬁcantly higher in
the LFD cases than in the non-LFD cases (incidence risk ratio: 134.8, 95%
conﬁdence interval: 18.6 to 976.7).
Conclusion: The measurement of the placental diameter as a screening
method for the detection of FGR appears to be useful.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.113

P2.114

A CASE OF LARGE PLACENTAL CHORIOANGIOMA USING THE TEI
INDEX IN FETAL RIGHT VENTRICLE TO EVALUATE CARDIAC
FUNCTION – COMPARISON WITH SIX RECIPIENT FETUSES
WITH TWIN TO TWIN TRANSFUSION SYNDROME –

THE MATERNAL-TO-FETAL KINETIC ANALYSIS OF
FRACTALKINE/CX3CL1

Kenjiro Date, Haruko Takamoto, Chie Koide
JR Hiroshima General Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan
Objectives: Placental chorioangioma is the most common benign tumor of
placenta, found in approximately 1% of all pregnancies. Large chorioangioma is often associated with fetal complications including prematurity, heart failure and intrauterine death. Evaluation of the ventricular
function with fetal heart failure is important to determine the perinatal
management. The purpose of this study was to evaluate right ventricular
function of fetus using the Tei index measured by Doppler
echocardiography.
Methods: A control group consisted of 60 fetuses in normal pregnancies.
The study group consisted of one fetus with large placental chorioangioma
at 28 weeks, and six recipient fetuses with twin to twin transfusion
syndrome. The Tei index in the right ventricle and Aorta Vmax were
measured prenatally with the Aloka SSD 5000 ultrasonographic system.
Results: The Tei index for the control fetuses was 0.5 or less and had no
correlation to gestational weeks. Large placental chorioangioma was
measured 10 cm in diameter. Aorta Vmax were high values, but the Tei
indices were within normal range. The new born infant was unremarkable
without heart failure. For six recipient fetuses, amnioreduction was done
in case numbers 1, 4, and 5, and fetoscopic laser photocoagulation (FLP)
was performed in case number 6. In case numbers 2, 4, and 6, fetuses had
high Tei indices. In case numbers 2, the neonate was treated for heart
failure . In case number 4, the Tei indices was elevated over 1.0, Aorta Vmax
fell below 20cm/sec, and the fetus died in utero at 24 weeks. In case
number 6, after FLP the Tei indices were within normal limits, and the
infant had an unremarkable postnatal course.
Conclusion: In this study, fetuses with right heart failure had high Tei
indices. These results suggest that the Tei index may prove useful in
assessing fetal right ventricular function.

A135

YS Chang, H Ishii, Y Nakai, T Ishida, S Fuke, T Maeda, T Nakamura,
K Shimoya
Kawasaki Medical School, Japan
Fractalkine is a CX3C chemokine that has chemoattractant activity for T
cells, monocytes and natural killer (NK) cells. We have previously
demonstrated that fractalkine protein was detected as a 95kDa band in
both the amniotic ﬂuid and the amnion during the second and third
trimesters. Immunohistochemistry using an anti fractalkine polyclonal
antibody revealed positive staining of epithelial cells in amnion and
trophoblasts in both the second and third trimesters. RT–PCR detected
fractalkine mRNA transcripts in the amnion. Neonatal urine also contained
detectable amounts of fractalkine. CX3CR1 positive cells had migrated into
the amniotic ﬂuid and the amnion. Preterm labor and chorioamnionitis are
strongly associated with chemokine network. In the present study, we
demonstrate the association between maternal/neonatal fractalkine levels
and preterm labor/chiriosomnionitis.
Materials and Methods: Samples of maternal and umbilical blood,
placenta and membranes were collected. We assayed fractalkine in
maternal sera before delivery and umbilical sera by ELISA. And we
analyzed the expressions of fractalkine and its receptor in placenta and
membranes by Western Blotting. We excluded the cases complicated with
intrauterine fetal death, multiple pregnancies, fetal anomalies and
abortion.
Results: We evaluated 151 deliveries. Fractalkine concentration in
maternal sera had no signiﬁcant differences between term and preterm
deliveries. Fractalkine concentration in maternal sera had elevated in cases
with histological chorioamnionitis at term. Fractalkine concentrations in
umbilical sera were signiﬁcantly higher those of maternal sera. The
expression of fractalkine receptor in placenta was positively correlated
with that in the membranes, and the expressions had no signiﬁcant
differences in the period of deliveries and chorioamnionitis. The expression of fractalkine in placenta was positively correlated with membranes,
and the expressions of placenta in term deliveries had elevated compared
to preterm deliveries.
Conclusion: Fractalkine was continually present in maternal sera. Fractalkine in umbilical sera might have important roles in immunological
regulation.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A136

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.115

P2.116

DRAMATIC ALTERATIONS IN MICROTUBULE NUCLEATION IN
FUSED BEWO CELLS

IGFBP-3 ENHANCES IGF-II CELL SIGNALLING THROUGH
ACTIVATION OF SPHINGOSINE KINASE AND S1P PRODUCTION
IN HUMAN EXTRAVILLOUS TROPHOBLAST CELLS

G Ishikawa1, T Takeshita1, W Ackerman2, D Vandre2, J Robinson2
1
Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan, 2Ohio State University, Columbus,
USA
Objective: The formation of syncytia from mononuclear cells leads to
a number of changes in cellular structure. We focus on alterations to the
microtubule cytoskeleton in fused BeWo cells.
Methods: BeWo cells were used as surrogates for cytotrophoblasts and
were induced to fuse by treatment with forskolin (FK). BeWo cells were
treated with FK for 48 hours to induce cell fusion; this was followed by
treatment with nocodazole to induce microtubule depolymerization and
wash out of the drug to induce subsequent microtubule re-growth. Antibodies to a-tubulin, g-tubulin, and pericentrin were used in immunoﬂuorescence experiments to monitor microtubule organization.
Results: In both control (non-fused) and FK-treated (fused) cells microtubule depolymerization was observed following 30 minute exposure to
ice-cold nocodazole. In both groups of cells, re-growth of microtubules was
found soon after wash out of nocodazole and return to 37C. However,
microtubule re-growth was different in the two types of cells. In controls,
re-growth was centered at the centrosome and radiating outward like
spokes of a wheel. In fused cells, the re-growth did not originate from
single sites but appeared to be nucleated from broad areas that had
increased labeling for pericentrin.
Conclusions: We show a dramatic alteration in the amount of and
distribution of pericentrin in fused BeWo cells compared to mononuclear
cells. Moreover, these expanded areas of pericentrin serve as sites for
microtubule nucleation.

X Lu1,2, Q Qiu3, A Gruslin4,5, H Wang1
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 2Graduate School of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 33Chronic Disease Program,
Ottawa Health Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada, 4Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada, 5Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Ottawa Hospita,, Ottawa, Canada
1

Introduction: IGF system plays an important role in placental development and fetal growth. It is well accepted that IGFBP-3 forms a complex
with IGF-II thus preventing free IGF-II from accessing its receptor and
activating cell signaling. However, in other cell types, IGFBP-3 has also
been shown to positively regulate IGF cell signaling by up-regulating
sphingosine kinase expression. Whether this may also occur in trophoblast cells is unknown.
Material and Results: Our study shows that human extravillous trophoblast cells (HTR8/SVneo cells) secrete IGFBPs, including IGFBP-3, and IGF-II.
Pre-treatment of HTR8/SVneo cells with low concentrations of IGFBP3
enhances IGF-II-induced cell signaling as indicated by increases in phosphorylation of AKT and ERK. This also translated into increased trophoblast
migration. In contrast, when cells are treated with higher dosages of
IGFBP-3 and IGF-II, IGF-II cell signaling is inhibited. Co-treatment of IGFBP3 and sphingosine induces ERK phosphorylation, an effect mediated by
sphingosine phosphate (S1P, the product of sphingosine kinase). This effect
is attenuated by DMS (sphingosine kinase inhibitor). Furthermore, low
dose IGFBP-3 treatment for 1 hour increases sphingosine kinase protein
content and its phosphorylation in the membrane fraction of trophoblast
cells without affecting its total protein level, indicating IGFBP3 induces
sphingosine kinase activation. Finally, we also observed that S1P itself
enhances IGF-II-mediated AKT and ERK phosphorylation as well as IGF-IIinduced IGF1R phosphorylation. \
Conclusion: At low concentrations, IGFBP3 enhances IGF-II-mediated
signalling and cell migration by activating sphingosine kinase and S1P
production in human extravillous trophoblast cells. This suggests the tight
regulation of IGFBP-3 expression is important in the regulation of IGF-II
–related functions, including trophoblast migration.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 33 (2012) A1–A137

P2.117
FURIN GENE (FUR) REGULATION IN DIFFERENTIATING HUMAN
TROPHOBLAST CELLS: INVOLVEMENT OF CREB IN REGULATING
FUR P1 PROMOTER
Z Zhou1,2, R Wang1,2, XY Lu1, HY Lin1, C Zhu1, H Wang1
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 2Graduate School of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
1

Furin promotes trophoblast cell fusion and both mRNAs and proteins of
furin are upregulated during syncytialization of human trophoblast cells.
Three promoters (P1, P1A and P1B) are reported to mediate transcriptional
activation of furin. However, the exact role of these promoters and the
transcriptional regulation of furin gene during syncytializaiton are largely
unknown.

A137

Objectives: The objective of this study is to uncover the mechanism of
transcriptional regulation of furin in human trophoblast syncytialization.
Methods and Results: Furin mRNA level was increased during fusion of
both BeWo carcinoma cells and primary term cytotrophoblast cells, and
blocking PKA signalling pathway dramatically decreased the expression of
furin mRNA during trophoblast cell fusion. Several potential CRE-sites
were identiﬁed in human furin promoters region, and luciferase reporter
studies led to the identiﬁcation of CREB, a bZIP-type protein, stimulating
the transcription of furin in BeWo cells. By performing EMSA assay, we
found that CREB binds on the exact binding sites of furin P1 promoter.
Finally, we showed that CREB mediated furin activation was critical during
trophoblast cell fusion process.
Conclusion: CREB-dependent stimulation of the P1 promoter of furin is of
great signiﬁcance in furin transcriptional activation during human
trophoblast syncytialization.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

