Seminars in Immunology 28 (2016) 54–63

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Seminars in Immunology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ysmim

Review

Enhancing T cell therapy by overcoming the immunosuppressive
tumor microenvironment
Ainhoa Arina a,∗ , Leticia Corrales b , Vincenzo Bronte c,∗
a
b
c

Department of Radiation and Cellular Oncology, The Ludwig Center for Metastasis Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
Verona University Hospital and Department of Medicine, Verona 37134, Italy

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 30 November 2015
Received in revised form 25 January 2016
Accepted 26 January 2016
Available online 10 February 2016
Keywords:
Immunosuppression
Cancer
Microenvironment
TIL
Inﬁltration
MDSC

a b s t r a c t
Immune response to tumors can be successfully oriented for therapeutic purposes, as shown by the clinical efﬁcacy of checkpoint blockade in extending the survival of patients with certain solid and hematologic
neoplasms. Nonetheless, numerous patients do not beneﬁt from these new treatments. Tumor-speciﬁc
CD8+ T lymphocytes, either endogenously revived by checkpoint interference or adoptively transferred
after in vitro expansion and retargeting, can be extremely efﬁcient in controlling metastatic disease but
have to overcome a number of restraints imposed by growing tumors. This immune escape relies on
a profound modiﬁcation of the tumor environment, which is rendered less permissive to lymphocyte
arrival, persistence, and functional activity. We review here emerging ﬁndings on the main negative circuits limiting the efﬁcacy of cancer immunotherapy, as well as novel and conventional approaches that
can translate into rational combination therapies.
© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Immunotherapy of cancer is rapidly emerging as a frontline
approach to cancer therapy due to the recent success of checkpoint inhibitors and adoptive T cell therapy (ACT) of cancer in the
clinic. Checkpoint inhibitors such as antibodies blocking PD1/PDL1,
achieved long-term survival and durable remissions in subsets of
cancer patients [1–4]. However, still many patients show a shortterm beneﬁt or no beneﬁt at all. On the other hand, ACT with in
vitro-expanded, tumor inﬁltrating lymphocytes (TIL) or T cells from
peripheral blood genetically modiﬁed to target the tumor [5–7], has
shown best results so far in metastatic melanoma treated with TILs
[7], and in acute lymphoblastic leukemia for genetically-modiﬁed
T cells [8]. There is still ample room for improvement of efﬁcacy,

Abbreviations: ACT, adoptive T cell therapy; TLS, tertiary lymphoid structures; MDSC, myeloid derived-supressor cells; Tfh, T follicular helper; NSCLC,
non-small cell lung cancer; MSR, mesoporous silica rods; PSC, pancreatic stellate
cells; TIL, tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes; TAM, tumor-associated macrophages;
RNS, reactive nitrogen species; IDO, indoleamine 2,3 deoxygenase; CAF, cancer
associate ﬁbroblast; IR, ionizing radiation; COX-1, Cyclooxigenase-1; DPP4, dipeptidyl peptidase-4; ATRA, all-trans retinoic acid; TBI, total body irradiation; 5-FU,
5-ﬂuouracil; CTX, cyclophosphamide.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: aarina@bsd.uchicago.edu (A. Arina), vincenzo.bronte@univr.it
(V. Bronte).

in particular in solid malignancies other than melanoma. Two elements can be modiﬁed to achieve better therapeutic effects from
adoptively transferred T cells: the potency of the T cells themselves,
and the often T cell-refractory tumor microenvironment in which
T cells must exert their anti-tumoral function. It is likely that therapeutic intervention directed at the tumor microenvironment would
be particularly important for such cases when the T cell quality is
suboptimal [9]. The tumor microenvironment can be a formidable
hurdle for therapeutic effect of endogenous or adoptively transferred T cells by limiting T cell inﬁltration [10], and by counteracting
T cell activity with a myriad of immunosuppressive mechanisms
[11].
Evidence that improved survival [12–14] and clinical responses
to immunotherapy e.g. with checkpoint inhibitors correlate with
the presence of T cells in the tumor microenvironment [15], has
been the driving force to look for the genetic mechanisms dictating T cell inﬁltration or exclusion from tumors [16,17]. One
such tumor cell intrinsic mechanisms involve the activation of
the WNT/␤-catenin oncogenic pathway, which resulted in T cell
exclusion by repressing the expression of CCL4 chemokine and
subsequent inﬁltration of CD103+ /CD8␣+ dendritic cells (DC) [17].
Other genetic mechanisms explaining differences in tumor inﬁltration by T cells concern non-malignant cells in the tumor,
such as endothelial cells (see below). Strategies to increase
tumor inﬁltration have traditionally targeted tumor vasculature and/or manipulated the chemokines present in the tumor

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.smim.2016.01.002
1044-5323/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A. Arina et al. / Seminars in Immunology 28 (2016) 54–63

microenvironment. New approaches take advantage from the
advancements in biomaterials using porous scaffolds, which can
deliver or attract immune cells upon implantation in vivo. Current
active research on the formation of ectopic tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) might provide translational clues to generate de novo
TLS in tumors, potentially making use of such biomaterials.
Immunosuppressive mechanisms in tumors include T cell
intrinsic control mechanisms such as the up-regulation of
molecules that decrease T cell function (e.g. PD1), and T cell
extrinsic mechanisms including cellular elements such as myeloidderived suppressor cells (MDSC) and ﬁbroblasts, and molecules
such as indoleamine 2,3 deoxygenase (IDO), among many others. Either blocking such inhibitory mechanisms, or promoting
immunostimulatory mechanisms that are downregulated or absent
in tumors, could revive a more favorable environment for T cells.
The discovery of checkpoint blockade and the encouraging results
achieved in the clinic with mAbs interfering with rheostats of T
cell activation represent the ﬁrst tangible demonstration that it
is possible to reverse cancer-induced T cell dysfunctions and this
is sufﬁcient to cause tumor eradication, at least in some patients
affected by speciﬁc malignancies. On a general note, it appears
that currently explored checkpoint inhibitors can intercept at least
two different routes: one affecting systemic tolerance (CTLA4)
and another acting on local, intra-tumoral restraints (PD-1/PDL1). While CTLA4 blockade can enhance CD8+ T cell inﬁltration
in treated patients [18] and hence predispose the tumor environment to the activity of PD-1/PD-L1 blockade, the response to the
last checkpoint inhibitors is dependent on pre-existing, tumorinﬁltrating CD8+ T cells [19]. In experimental melanoma models,
the combination of mAbs anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD-L1 increased the
intratumoral ratio of effector T cell to both Treg and MDSC [20],
ﬁndings that might explain the recent conﬁrmation of the additive
activity of combination therapy in a randomized, phase III study in
metastatic melanoma patients [21].
Preclinical data support the notion that checkpoint inhibitors
could be synergistic with ACT [22–27]. This is reasonable as ex vivo
“revived” or genetically manipulated T cells will likely decrease
their function upon prolonged exposure to the tumor microenvironment. Since different reviews have recently addressed the
biology and clinical signiﬁcance of checkpoint blockade [28,29],
we will focus our attention on emerging strategies to overcome
suppressive mechanisms in cancer that can boost the efﬁcacy of
tumor-speciﬁc CD8+ T lymphocytes. Speciﬁcally, we will discuss
the regulation of myelomonocytic cell recruitment, reversion of
the enzymatic inhibition of T cell activation and targeting of the
ﬁbroblastic tumor stroma. We will also discuss novel ways to overcome immune suppression by promoting immune stimulation in
the tumor via STING/type I IFN, or systemically, by manipulating
gut microbiota.
In summary, here we will review therapeutic approaches,
including conventional cancer therapies, i.e. radiotherapy and
chemotherapy, that result in increased T cell inﬁltration or reversed
immunosuppression within the tumor microenvironment and
could therefore be combined with T cell therapy for enhancing its
impact on cancer patients.

2. Strategies to increase tumor inﬁltration by T cells
2.1. Generation of lymphoid structures inside tumors
Tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) are ectopic lymphoid formations that display an organization very similar to that of lymph
nodes, including a T cell zone with mature DC, a germinal center
with proliferating B cells, follicular DC and T follicular helper (Tfh)
cells (reviewed in [30]). TLS develop under conditions of chronic

55

inﬂammation and cancer, and their presence has been associated
with improved prognosis in lung and colorectal cancers [31–33].
Clinical responses to vaccinations against HPV in patients with
advanced cervical intraepithelial neoplasia were associated with
generation of TLS [34]. However, not all lymphoid aggregates in
tumors reminiscent of TLS are necessarily indicative of a strong
adaptive immune response against the tumor, but certain qualitative requirements seem to exist. For example, in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, high density of CD8 T cells per se
is not a prognostic value unless combined with a high density of
mature DC [35]. Similarly, the generation of TLS after vaccination
with a GMCSF-secreting vaccine in pancreatic cancer patients, did
not correlate with improved survival unless it showed a suppressed
T regulatory (Treg) and enhanced Th17 gene signature [36]. Expression of CCL21 by cancer cells in a mouse tumor model resulted in
the generation of lymphoid-like structures that contained mostly
Treg cells but no B cell germinal centers, and fueled immune tolerance and tumor progression [37]. In breast cancer, the presence
of Tfh in germinal centers predicted high lymphocytic inﬁltration,
survival and response to chemotherapy [38]. Therefore, therapeutic strategies should be directed at the generation of TLS with all
the elements of germinal centers. Although generation of TLS for
immunotherapy of cancer has not been experimentally tested yet,
a conceptually close approach pursuing the generation of ectopic
lymphoid tissue to promote antitumor T cell responses is based on
the use of LIGHT. LIGHT (TNFSF14) is a member of the TNF family that can act as a costimulatory molecule through binding to
HVEM on T cells [39]. LIGHT can also be secreted as a cytokine and
bind lymphotoxin-␤ receptor (LT␤R) expressed on non-lymphoid
cells. LT␤R signaling promotes the organization and maintenance
of lymphoid structures including lymph nodes, through its ability to induce the expression of various chemokines such as CCL21,
as well as adhesion molecules [40]. Overexpression of LIGHT by
cancer cells in preclinical models dramatically increased T cell inﬁltration of T cell-void tumors [41]. This correlated with an increase
in expression of CXCL10, CXCL9 and CCL21, as well as MAdCAM-1
in the tumor. Exogenous administration of an adenovirus encoding LIGHT before surgical excision of the tumor generated CTL that
eliminated distant metastases [42].
2.2. Use of porous scaffolds
Novel strategies linking material engineering and immunology exploit organic or inorganic scaffolds implanted in mice to
manipulate the trafﬁcking of immune cells [43,44]. Macroporous
scaffolds have been generated from polymerized alginate that integrate a collagen-mimetic peptide to facilitate T cell migration, plus
macroparticles with soluble IL15/IL15R␣ fusion protein, and lipid
bilayer-bound anti-CD3, -CD28 and -CD137 antibodies to promote
T cell activation and survival [44]. Surgical implantation of such
organic scaffolds preloaded with anti-tumor T cells resulted in
dramatically improved anti-tumoral effects when compared to systemic administration of the T cells, in a model of residual disease
following surgical resection of breast cancer, and in an aggressive
ovarian cancer model [44]. The antitumor effects were accompanied by strong proliferation and heavy inﬁltration of tumors by
T cells delivered by the scaffold. In a similar approach, inorganic
mesoporous silica rods (MSRs) have been used to create scaffolds that achieved sustained release of bioactive molecules and
recruited high numbers of DC [43]. A unique feature of these MSRs
is that they are delivered by needle injection and spontaneously
assemble to form 3D structures (the “scaffolds”), therefore bypassing the need for surgical implantation. MSRs technology was proven
to generate strong antibody and T cell responses when used for
vaccination. Although T cell inﬁltration of tumors in a therapeutic setting was not assessed, it is conceivable that the recruitment

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

56

A. Arina et al. / Seminars in Immunology 28 (2016) 54–63

of DC to peritumoral/intratumoral sites, combined to proper activation signals that could be delivered in the MSRs scaffolds might
promote higher recruitment of T cells into the tumor.
2.3. Manipulation of chemokines in the tumor microenvironment
Chemokine gradients govern T cells migration into healthy tissues and tumors and therefore represent an obvious target when
seeking to increase tumor inﬁltration by T cells. Recent studies in
mice make use of pharmacological agents already available in the
clinics for that purpose. In an example of drug repurposing, Barreira da Silva et al. [45] found that treatment of tumor-bearing mice
with Sitagliptin, currently used in type II-diabetes, increased tumor
inﬁltration by T cells. Sitagliptin inhibits the enzyme dipeptidyl
peptidase-4 (DPP4). Membrane-bound or soluble DPP4 mediate
in vivo truncation of the CXCL10 chemokine among other proteins.
In this study, the effect of Sitagliptin in augmenting T cell inﬁltration seemed speciﬁc of the CXCR3/CXCL10 axis. Treatment with
Sitaglaptin was synergistic with checkpoint inhibitors anti-CTLA4
and anti-PD1 administered together. In another study, Ene-Obong
et al. observed that in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, poor survival correlated with lower densities of CD8 T
cells in the stroma adjacent to tumor cells [46]. Activated pancreatic stellate cells (PSC) present in non-adjacent stroma, secreted
CXCL12 that “sequestered” CD8 T cells away from the tumor, preventing their access to the tumor regions. Consistently, treatment
of mice bearing fully developed pancreatic tumors with ATRA (alltrans retinoic acid), which renders PSC quiescent, increased CD8
T cell inﬁltration in juxtatumoral stroma. However, the effect of
ATRA might be not mediated only by a decreased production of
CXCL12, since quiescent PSC produce lower levels of other proteins
that can prevent T cell inﬁltration such as ﬁbronectin [46]. Notably,
increasing levels of CXCL12 in the tumor itself would not necessarily increase T cell inﬁltration, since too high levels of this chemokine
can cause repulsion of T cells [47], as further discussed below.
2.4. Targeting tumor vasculature
A number of studies focused on the peculiarities of tumor
vasculature to reverse poor T cell inﬁltration of tumors. Speciﬁc
expression of certain molecules by tumor endothelial cells (FasL,
Endothelin B receptor) [16,48] or functional abnormalities causing
poor perfusion [49], resulted into paucity of CD8 T cells inﬁltrating
tumor tissue. Administration of low-dose TNF directed to tumor
vessels caused vascular “normalization” and increased tumor T
cell inﬁltration in a murine model of pancreatic cancer. Reprogrammed macrophages in treated tumors produced angiopoietin
2 that sensitized endothelial cells to VCAM induction by low-dose
TNF, which promoted leukocyte adhesion [50]. Interestingly, vessel normalization by low-dose TNF, but not vascular destruction by
IFN␥ improved survival. Low-dose TNF also enhanced the efﬁcacy
of therapeutic vaccination and adoptive T cell transfer.
Targeting of VEGF/VEGFR pathway in preclinical studies
resulted in higher CD8 T cell inﬁltration that was associated with
enhanced effects of cancer cell vaccines [51,52] and adoptive T
cell therapy [53]. In particular, low doses of anti-VEGF receptor
2-antibody [52] showed very similar effects to low-dose TNF. The
immune-promoting effects of VEGF blockade were therefore initially attributed to vessel normalization [52,53]. However, a recent
study suggests an alternative mechanism involving FasL [48]. VEGF
and Cyclooxigenase-1 (COX-1) co-expressed in human ovarian cancer, cooperate with IL10 to induce FasL expression speciﬁcally in
tumor endothelium. Endothelial FasL killed CD8 T cells preferentially compared to Tregs, due to higher expression of c-FLIP in Tregs.
Pharmacological blockade of VEGF and COX1 with anti-VEGF antibodies and acetylsalicylic acid respectively, limited FasL expression

on endothelium, increasing CD8 T cell inﬁltration and enhancing
the anti-tumoral effects of adoptive T cell transfer. Therefore, the
increased T cell inﬁltration found after anti-angiogenesis therapy
could be due to a reduction of FasL-mediated killing of CD8 T cells.
A search for molecules differentially expressed by endothelial
cells from ovarian tumors with or without tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes (TILs), revealed endothelial B receptor (ETB R) as another
key molecule that can be pharmacologically targeted to increase
T cell inﬂux into tumors [16]. High expression of ETB R associated
with absence of TILs in ovarian cancer patients. The mechanism
suggested involved increased NO production resulting in decreased
expression of ICAM1 by endothelium. In vivo treatment of mice
with a speciﬁc ETB R-inhibitor peptide, BQ-788, increased T cell
homing, and synergized with prophylactic and therapeutic vaccination protocols in preclinical models in which the vaccine showed
no therapeutic beneﬁt by itself.

3. Strategies to overcome suppressive mechanisms in the
tumor microenvironment
3.1. Modulation of cytokine and chemokine microenvironment to
regulate myelomonocytic cell recruitment
MDSC and tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) recruited or
differentiated within the tumor by tumor-derived factors inhibit
the innate and adaptive antitumor immune response and aid
tumorigenesis by invasion of nearby tissues, stroma remodeling,
and promotion of cell proliferation, among others. Thus, targeting
their recruitment or functionality has potential for cancer treatment [54].
The simplest way to inhibit immune regulatory myelomonocytic cells in cancer is to cut their recruitment to the tumor stroma
since many of the stromal cells are constantly replenished by blood
circulating precursors. For example, the vast majority of TAM originates from the monocyte pool, and their recruitment is primarily
determined by the CCL2-CCR2 axis. Among chemokines, CCL2 represents the natural candidate, and preclinical studies have shown
that CCL2 blockade can be used also to boost anti-tumor immunity,
in addition to exert an anti-metastatic activity. In fact, administration of anti-CCL2/CCL12 mAbs combined with a recombinant
vaccines for different NSCLC mouse models augmented efﬁcacy
and enhanced and resulted in cure of about half of the mice [55].
Moreover, the combined treatment increased the number of activated intratumoral CD8+ T cells. Even when used as single agent
in models of NSCLC, antitumor and anti-metastatic activity of CCL2
blockade was lost in immunodeﬁcient mice [56]. Interestingly, the
treatment did not alter the number of TAM but their function, which
lead to the activation of CD8+ T lymphocytes within the tumor. In
agreement, with these results, we observed that tumors expressing a strong antigen can be spontaneously rejected in ccl2 gene
ablated mice [57]. The effect depends, in part, on the creation of
a tolerogenic environment in the spleen of tumor-bearing hosts.
In fact, through the CCR2/CCL2 axis the spleen of tumor-bearing
mice accumulate Ly6Chi monocytic cells in the marginal zone: these
cells share markers with granulocyte–macrophage progenitors and
show properties in common with hemopoietic precursors, since
they can give rise to both mononuclear phagocytes and granulocytes [57]. Interestingly, CCL2 serum levels in cancer patients
correlate with accumulation of myeloid progenitors and predict
overall survival of patients who respond to cancer vaccines [57].
Targeting CCL2/CCR2 axis with a monoclonal antibody (carlumab,
CNTO 888) showed initial but modest effects as single therapeutic agent in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer [58,59], paving the way to possible combination strategies
with immune modulators. However, the sudden discontinuation

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A. Arina et al. / Seminars in Immunology 28 (2016) 54–63

of the therapy in mice resulted in unwanted and severe rebound
effects, with an increased mobilization of monocytes from bone
marrow, overproduction of IL-6 and VEGF-A that caused increased
metastatic disease and death [60]. An interesting evolution of targeting CCL2/CCR2 axis is based on the delivery of small interference
RNA targeting CCR2 mRNA to monocytes, by means of optimized
lipid nanoparticles: repeated treatment with these nanocarriers
resulted in a reduced accumulation of TAM in two different mouse
tumor models [61]. In addition to the adverse action on metastases, targeting CCL2 for long time might have secondary effects,
since the CCL2-CCR2 axis is required for monocyte recruitment in
infection and normal homeostatic replenishment of the intestinal
macrophage pool.
The intra-tumoral production of reactive nitrogen species (RNS),
such as peroxynitrite, can induce post-translational modiﬁcations
of chemokines and cytokines by nitration/nitrosylation of speciﬁc
amino acids, as shown for human and mouse CCL2. As a result of
these changes, the modiﬁed CCL2 could no longer attract tumorspeciﬁc CD8+ T lymphocytes, but could still recruit myeloid cells
to the tumor site [62]. This is an additional mechanism contributing to create a cold tumor environment, which can be reversed
by pharmacological intervention. In fact, in vivo administration
of a novel drug, the [3-((aminocarbonyl)furoxan-4-yl]methyl salicylate (AT38) that blocks intratumoral RNS production, ablated
post-translational, RNS-induced modiﬁcation of CCL2, promoted a
robust T cell inﬁltration within the tumor, and allowed the adoptively transferred, tumor-speciﬁc CD8+ T lymphocytes to reject
solid tumors [62].
Another cytokine controlling monocyte recruitment and conversion to macrophages in the inﬂamed tumor environment is
CSF-1. The pharmacologic inhibitor of CSF-1R signaling, GW2580,
abrogated tumor recruitment of CD11b+ Gr-1lo Ly6Chi monocytic
(MO)-MDSC in mice bearing a lung carcinoma model and decreased
the expression of both proangiogenic and immunosuppressive
genes [63]. A brain-penetrant tyrosine kinase inhibitor of CSF-1R
tyrosine kinase activity (BLZ945) blocked tumor progression and
increased mouse survival in a model of autochthonous, PDGFB-driven glioma [64]. Even though circulating myeloid cells and
microglia were reduced in mice exposed to BLZ945, tumors had
similar numbers of TAM, another example suggesting that redundant chemoattractants might be responsible for TAM recruitment.
In glioma-bearing mice, BLZ945 modiﬁed the M2 polarization of
TAM, increasing their killing and phagocytic function and blocking glioma cell-macrophage heterotypic signaling. Of translational
value, gene signatures of mouse TAM reconditioned by BLZ945
therapy associated with enhanced survival in patients affected
by proneural glioblastoma multiforme [64]. The clinical relevance
of blocking CSF-1/CSF-1R signaling was also conﬁrmed in an
experimental setting in which radiotherapy was followed by an
increase in CSF-1 expression in immunocompetent mice bearing
prostate cancer; in this setting, CSF-1R inhibition with GW2580
and PLX3397 greatly affected myeloid inﬁltration and signiﬁcantly
delayed tumor regrowth after irradiation [65].
The role of CSF-1R in promoting the immunosuppressive
tumor microenvironment was conﬁrmed by recent clinical studies. Patients with locally advanced tenosynovial giant cell tumor
(PVNS), not amenable to surgical treatment were treated with
RG71555, a human monoclonal antibody that inhibits the dimerization of CSF-1R. Patients showed clinical responses associated with
profound reduction of CSF-1R+ and CD163+ macrophages in tumor
tissues accompanied by an increase in CD8+ T cells, which reproduced results in transplantable tumor models characterized by
robust TAM inﬁltration [66]. Adverse effects were modest (mostly
periorbital edema) but a fast and persistent depletion of human
CD14+ CD16+ but not CD14+ CD16− monocytes was observed [66].
To conﬁrm the systemic effects on normal macrophages, the

57

RG7155 mAb reduced CSF-1R+ and CD68+ CD163+ macrophages in
the liver and colon of cynomologus monkeys, whereas alveolar
macrophages in the lung were marginally affected [66]. Another
monoclonal antibody against CSF-1R (IMC-CS4) is undergoing a
phase I clinical trial (NCT01346358) to assess safety and pharmacokinetic proﬁle in patients with advanced solid tumors, either
refractory to standard therapy or for whom no standard therapy is
available. Moreover, PLX-3397, a small inhibitor of CSF-1R is tested
in ongoing phase I/II clinical trials both in solid and hematological
tumors.
3.2. Reversing the enzymatic inhibition of T cell activation.
The myelo-monocyte compartment conditioned by developing
cancers can alter the functionality of tumor-speciﬁc CD8+ T lymphocytes also by imposing metabolic restraints. Many enzymes
with immune regulatory activity are up-regulated, either in tumor
environment or draining lymph nodes, such as arginase 1, inducible
nitric oxide synthase and IDO, along with an increased production of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen and nitrogen species
[54]. Among these enzymes, targeting IDO for therapeutic interventions is advancing more rapidly to the clinic. This enzyme
catabolizes l-tryptophan and can be constitutively expressed in
the tumor cells or upregulated in myeloid cells in response to
local inﬂammatory signals, including the IFN-␥ produced by tumorinﬂiltrating T lymphocytes [67]. This counter-regulatory response,
which normally intervenes in the host to control tissue homeostasis during acute T lymphocyte activation, can become detrimental
for the anti-tumor activity of effector T lymphocytes. Thus, combination of IDO-inhibitor drugs with emerging immunotherapeutic
approaches may be synergistic, as indicated by preclinical studies
of combination therapies with anti-CTLA-4, anti-PD-1 or adoptively
transferred T cells [68–71].
3.3. Targeting cancer associated ﬁbroblasts
Cancer associate ﬁbroblast (CAF) can contribute to impede diffusion of soluble molecules and trafﬁcking of immune cells to the
tumor in virtue of their ability to produce components of the extracellular matrix. However, CAF expressing the ﬁbroblast activation
protein-a (FAP) on their membrane can release the chemochine
CXCL12, which can contribute in T cell exclusion from tumor environment (see Section 2.3). It has been advanced that, once released
in the environment, CXCL12 can coat cancer cells, masking them
from the immune attack through a not yet identiﬁed mechanism
[72]. CAF can be deleted by conditional knockout in mice bearing
an autochthonous pancreatic cancer and this synergizes with antiPD-L1 treatment in releasing the antitumor activity of pre-existing
T cells [72]. Since widespread depletion of FAP+ stromal cells might
have catastrophic consequences due to their function in regulating
tissue architecture homeostasis [73], CAF must be targeted by alternative approaches, such as their reprogramming by administration
of a vitamin D analog [74] or interfering with CXCL12 chemokine.
The latter treatment opened the environment of pancreatic cancer,
allowing the accumulation of T cells and tumor growth control in
association with anti-PD-L1 [72].
3.4. Enhancing innate immune recognition of tumors by using
STING agonists
Engagement of type I IFN receptor 1 (IFNAR1), recognizing both
IFN-␣ and -␤, in tumor-inﬁltrating CD8␣+ /CD103+ DC is required
for a full cross-presentation of tumor antigens and activation of
tumor-speciﬁc CD8+ T cells, both in primary tumors and after radiation therapy [75–78]. It is likely that the tumor antigens involved in
a successful cross-presentation and activation of therapeutic CD8+

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

58

A. Arina et al. / Seminars in Immunology 28 (2016) 54–63

T cell response are generated by passenger non-synonymous mutations in cancer genes [79]. Type I IFN production by DC requires the
sensing of tumor-cell derived DNA in the cytosolic DC compartment through the STING-mediated pathway. In brief, cytoplasm
detection of DNA by cGAMP synthase generates canonical 2 to 5
cyclic GMP-AMP, which binds to STING and promotes the recruitment and phosphorylation of TANK-binding kinase 1 and interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). IRF3 translocate to the nucleus where it
controls transcriptional programs leading to type I IFN production,
this cytokine acts in autocrine and paracrine fashion by binding to
receptors on tumor-associated DC [75–78].
Recent evidence indicates that STING pathway can be exploited
for enhancing intra-tumoral immunity. First, interference with
CTLA-4 and PD-1 rheostats is therapeutically ineffective in mice
lacking STING, suggesting that STING might be an essential downstream hub for checkpoint blockade therapies [76]. Moreover, the
STING activator cGAMP was unsuccessful alone but synergized
with radiation to decrease tumor burden and increase survival in
wild type but not STING-deﬁcient mice, which suggest that cGAMP
might be used as novel drug to decrease tumor resistance to radiation [78]. Last, intra-tumoral injection of non-canonical cyclic
dinucleotides, appropriately designed to activate human in addition to mouse STING, demonstrated therapeutic effects in multiple
mouse tumor models, including melanomas, breast, and colon cancers; mice that regressed tumors developed a long lasting memory
CD8+ T cell response and rejected a second tumor challenge [80].
3.5. Promotion of anti-tumor immunity by manipulation of gut
microbiota
Myeloid cell distribution and function within the tumor
microenvironment is partly inﬂuenced by the gut microbiota, to
the extent that chemotherapy and active immunotherapy can be
severely impaired in microbiota-depleted mice [81]. In particular,
gut microbiota seems to release unidentiﬁed signals that maintain a functional tone in myelomonocytic cells and allow them to
respond with diversiﬁed cancer killing programs to either platinum
therapy or the immune stimulatory combination of intra-tumoral
injection of mAbs blocking IL-10R and the TLR9 agonist CpGoligonucleotides [81]. A multifaceted relationship also connects
microbiota and checkpoint blockade therapy. Either antibiotictreated or germ-free mice bearing transplantable melanomas did
not respond to anti-CTLA4 therapy unless distinct Bacteroides
species were introduced back in the gut. T cell responses speciﬁc for
B. thetaiotaomicron or B. fragilis associated with the efﬁcacy of CTLA4 blockade in both mice and patients. The therapeutic response to
checkpoint therapy was related to anti-CTLA4-induced subclinical
colitis, which caused bacterial colonization of the mucosal layer,
induction of Th1 immune responses in the tumor draining lymph
nodes and maturation of intratumoral DC [82]. Another commensal, Biﬁdobacterium was responsible for the resistance of mouse
strains housed in different mouse facilities, and oral administration of this bacterial species was sufﬁcient to improve melanoma
tumor control and synergize with anti-PD-L1 therapy. Analogously
to the previous case, the increased DC functionality at the tumor
site and the consequent enhancement of CD8+ T cell priming and
accumulation in the tumor microenvironment were found to be
responsible for the microbiota-driven help [83].
4. Conventional therapies as immunostimulants
The rising of immunotherapy has also directed investigators
to study the interactions of conventional therapies, i.e. radio and
chemotherapy, with the immune system. In the case of radiation, it is increasingly clear that the immune function of the

host will determine the extent of therapeutic response [84–86].
Recent preclinical work has focused on high-dose “ablative” radiation, uncovering a role for STING-mediated [78] activation of class
I-interferon production by the immune system [87] in the immunestimulating effects of radiation. These ﬁndings lay out the rationale
for combination therapies, such as checkpoint inhibition or ACT
plus radiotherapy. Similarly, cumulative evidence indicates that
the efﬁcacy of chemotherapy relies at least partially in the immune
system, either by promoting the recognition of cancer cells, or by
eliminating suppressive mechanisms [88].
4.1. Radiotherapy
Local treatment of tumors with ionizing radiation (IR) acts at
several levels to promote both T cell inﬁltration and function.
Single doses of radiation increased in several animal models the
expression of adhesion molecules in endothelium, in particular
VCAM-1 [89–91], whereas ICAM-1 and E-selectin were upregulated in patients receiving conventional fractionated radiotherapy
[92]. Low doses (2 Gy) of local IR were sufﬁcient to induce this
response [91]. IR can also induce vascular normalization [93], in
particular when used in combination with adoptive T cell therapy [91,93]. Furthermore, IR can induce the expression of T cell
attractive chemokines such as CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL16 and CCL5 in
the tumor microenvironment [90,91,93,94]. All these mechanisms
result in an increased inﬂux of endogenous T cells at day 5–14 post
IR [91,94–97], whereas the recruitment of adoptively transferred T
cells can occur even at day 1–3 post-IR [89,94]. A possible explanation for this delay in the increase of endogenous when compared
to adoptively transferred T cells, might be a higher dependence on
the activation/reprogramming of innate immune cells, such as DC
[87,95] and TAM [91], which takes place quite rapidly after IR (day
1–3) [87,91,95].
Besides increasing tumor inﬁltration by T cells, radiation can
also activate the immune function. The mechanisms described
by which radiation can favor immune recognition of cancer cells
include: increased MHC expression [89,98,99], increased antigen
expression [100,101], up-regulation of Fas [102] and calreticulin
[103] on cancer cells. Furthermore, radiation can induce stromal
“loading” and subsequent recognition by T cells in tumors expressing strong antigens [87,104]. Since most of the studies have used
high-dose hypofractionated radiation, it is not clear at this point
whether conventional fractionated radiation is equally immunestimulatory. One of the few studies analyzing this question showed
that local low-dose gamma irradiation can alter myelomonocytic
cells in the tumor environment. In a mouse model of pancreatic cancer, low dose irradiation “reprogrammed” TAM toward
an M1-like phenotype characterized by enhanced secretion of
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines like IL-12 and nitric oxide output;
reconditioned macrophages supported anti-tumor Th1 responses,
endothelial activation and CTL recruitment to tumors [91].
With this background, a synergistic effect could be expected
from the combination of radiation with checkpoint inhibitors. For
the anti-CTLA4/radiation combination, a prominent effect in systemic disease was observed in preclinical models of metastatic
breast cancer [105]. In the ﬁrst thorough analysis of the combination between radiotherapy and checkpoint blockade in patients
with metastatic melanoma [106], regression of lesions occurred
in a number of patients receiving anti-CTLA4 and hypofractionated stereotactic radiation but the majority of them did not beneﬁt
from the therapy. Analyzing mice bearing tumors, the adjuvant
activity of local radiation on overall antitumor response related to
the broadened diversity of the TCR repertoire of intra-tumoral as
well as splenic and circulating T cells. Resistance was attributed
to upregulation of PD-L1 on melanoma cells and consequent T
cell exhaustion [106]. Radiation can increase the expression of

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A. Arina et al. / Seminars in Immunology 28 (2016) 54–63

PDL-1 in the tumor microenvironment [107], therefore the blockade of the PD-L1/PD-1 pathway might be necessary for optimal local
and systemic effects of checkpoint inhibitor/radiation combinatorial therapies, as suggested by preclinical studies [106–108].
IR is also used systemically (total body irradiation, TBI) as
preconditioning regime for adoptive T cell transfer, sometimes
in conjunction with chemotherapy [109]. TBI works through
mechanisms still incompletely understood, although increased
availability of T cell homeostatic cytokines resulting in homeostatic
expansion [110,111], decreased numbers of regulatory T cells [111],
and systemic innate immunity stimulation through TLR activation
[112], have been suggested. In mice, higher doses of preconditioning TBI before adoptive transfer correlated with better anti-tumoral
effects [113]. In patients, adding 12 Gy TBI to chemotherapy as
preconditioning regime increased the levels of pro-T cell survival
cytokines IL-7 and IL-15, and resulted in high response rates [114].
The mechanisms discussed above regarding local radiation could
also contribute to a higher inﬁltration of tumors by adoptively
transferred T cells after TBI, because the tumor is also irradiated.
The effects of TBI are long lasting, since they can still result in higher
inﬁltration when T cell transfer is delayed 3 weeks since TBI [93].
4.2. Chemotherapy
The antitumor activity of chemotherapy can rely on several
off-target, beneﬁcial effects directed toward the host innate and
adaptive immune system, which cooperate for successful tumor
eradication [115] by inﬂuencing both tumor immunogenicity and
tumor-induced suppression. Cancer cells dying after being exposed
to particular antineoplastic agents, such as anthracyclines and
oxaliplatin, either present on their surface or release extracellularly damage-associated molecular pattern molecules, including
calreticulin, ATP, and high mobility group box 1 protein, which in
turn can heighten the functions of DC [116]. The molecular mechanisms underlying this “immunogenic cell death” are different but
translate into enhanced phagocytosis and antigen presentation by
DC, DC maturation, activation of NLRP3-inﬂammasome-dependent
release of IL-1␤ and TLR4- and Myd88-dependent inﬂammatory
response, all contributing to various extent to enhance the priming
of anti-tumor T lymphocytes [116]. The activity of anthracyclines
on intratumoral DC can further extend to the point of guiding them
toward dying cancer cells, allowing the expression of formyl peptide receptor 1 (FPR1) and its tight association with the ligand
annexin 1. The genetic inactivation of Fpr1 impaired DC spatial
distribution in cancer, as well the ability to present antigens from
dying cells and prime T cell responses toward tumor antigen [117].
In clinical support of these ﬁndings, a loss-of-function allele of the
gene coding for formyl peptide receptor 1 (FPR1) associated with
poor metastasis-free and overall survival in breast and colorectal
cancer patients undergoing adjuvant chemotherapy [117].
Anthracyclines can also induce in cancer cells a TLR3-dependent
recognition of endogenous RNA leading to the autocrine release of
type I IFN and downstream production of the chemokine CxCL10
[118]. Thus, both autocrine and paracrine activity of IFN underlie
the in vivo efﬁcacy of chemotherapy on the adaptive immunity.
Chemotherapy can exert negative effect on the tumor environment by increasing the macrophage-assisted chemoresistance
of cancer cells (reviewed in [119]). However, depending on the
tumor and likely the stage of the disease, chemo and radiotherapy can reshape the stromal components by acting locally but
also in tumor distant sites. Conventional chemotherapeutic agents,
such as gemcitabine [120–122] and 5-ﬂuouracil (5-FU) [123], can
be extremely cytotoxic for MDSC; in particular, M-MDSC are particularly susceptible to low doses of these therapeutic agents,
doses with limited or no impact on cancer cells, but able to cause
a long-lasting depletion of the splenic M-MDSC pool [57]. The

59

elimination of M-MDSC relieved tumor-dependent immunosuppression and unmasked the therapeutic activity of otherwise
ineffective, adoptively transferred, tumor-speciﬁc T cells [57].
This selectivity can be further explored to improve ACT. We
recently found that lipid nanocapsules (LNCs) loaded with a
modiﬁed liposoluble form of gemcitabine targeted the immunosuppressive M-MDSC subset. Subcutaneous administration of
gemcitabine-loaded LNCs reduced the percentage of spleen and
tumor-inﬁltrating M-MDSC in lymphoma and melanoma-bearing
mice, with enhanced efﬁcacy when compared to free gemcitabine;
thus relieving tumor-associated immunosuppression. Very low
dose administration of gemcitabine-loaded LNCs increased the efﬁcacy of adoptive T cell therapy in tumor-bearing mice (Sasso et al.,
unpublished observations).
The effect of chemotherapy on myelomonocytic cells can also
heighten negative regulation of anti-tumor response, in part by
hyper-activation of the innate immunity pathways. Gemcitabine
and 5-FU, in fact, can trigger the inﬂammasome complex in
MDSC through the intracellular lysosomal permeabilization and the
release of cathepsin B. The resulting IL-1␤ production promoted the
secretion of IL-17 by CD4+ T cells, which had a negative impact on
the overall anticancer efﬁcacy of the combined chemotherapy regimen. Interestingly, anakinra, an IL-1 receptor antagonist approved
for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, could restore the therapeutic window by interfering with the effect of IL-1␤ released from
MDSC [124].
The selective depletion of monocytes in blood and lymphoid organs, including splenic immunosuppressive M-MDSC, was
recently shown for trabectedin, a drug approved in Europe (by
the EMEA) for the treatment of sarcomas and ovarian carcinomas, which also reduced TAM inﬁltration in multiple mouse cancer
models [125]. Interestingly, trabectedin selectively triggered cell
apoptosis in monocytes, but not in granulocytes and lymphocytes
[125]. The increased susceptibility to trabectedin of both human
and mouse monocytes was found to depend on the higher expression of TRAIL death receptors in these cells, which mediated the
cleavage of caspase-8 and the activation of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway [125]. The importance of apoptosis regulation in
MDSC biology is highlighted by recent ﬁndings. The development
of M-MDSC and polymorphonuclear (PMN)-MDSC subsets, in fact,
requires the continuous inhibition of different apoptotic pathways,
notably the caspase-8 dependent extrinsic pathway in M-MDSC,
and the mitochondrial intrinsic pathway in PMN-MDSC [126].
Despite the promising results of checkpoint blockade combination therapy, many patients with melanoma are refractory and
this percentage increases when other neoplasms are considered.
Interestingly, preclinical data support a rationale for combining
anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA4 treatment with epigenetic-modulating
drugs, such as inhibitors of either DNA methyltransferase or histone
deacetylase. This protocol was able to cure the majority of mice
bearing large transplantable tumors of poorly immunogenic and
metastatic colon and mammary carcinomas, by mainly affecting
the number of tumor-inﬁltrating and splenic PMN-MDSC. Further
investigation about the molecular target of the epigenetic regulation pointed to phosphatidylinositide 3-kinases: highly active
inhibitors mimicked the effect on PMN-MDSC without affecting
CD8+ T cell activity [127].
These data also reinforce the concept that cancers resistant
to immune checkpoint blockade can beneﬁt from MDSC elimination. Cisplatin preconditioning changed the percentages of
myeloid cells by increasing DC and eliminating MDSC and enhanced
cytokine-induced killer cell responses in melanoma-bearing mice
[128]. Paclitaxel, an agent inhibiting microtubules disassembly,
enforces MDSC differentiation to DC [129], whereas docetaxel, a
drug with similar action, selectively kills M2 macrophages and
polarizes MDSC toward an M1-like phenotype possibly through

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

60

A. Arina et al. / Seminars in Immunology 28 (2016) 54–63

Fig. 1. Different tumor environments require distinct approaches to improve cancer immunotherapy by T lymphocytes. From left to right, three main tumor environments
can be envisioned based on current evidence. Left panel: in some tumors, T cells are absent and vascularization is compromised, restricting the arrival and survival of incoming
T lymphocytes; approaches triggering a local activation and recruitment of APCs might be necessary to overcome these limitations to T cell therapy. Middle panel: deranged
vascularization might allow a limited inﬁltration of tumor-speciﬁc T cells, but treatments are necessary to promote additional and protracted inﬂux of effectors. Right panel:
in other tumors, vascularization is not the limiting factor, T cells can reach the environment but they are subject to a negative inﬂuence of tumor-induced inhibitory pathways.
These represent diagrammatic and summarizing scenarios, which might coexists under some circumstances. In the future, a full characterization of the immune proﬁle of
the patient’s tumor might help identifying the prevalent landscape(s). Abbreviations are indicated in the main text.

interference with STAT3 signaling [130]. Cyclophosphamide (CTX)
seems to induce complex and sometimes conﬂicting effects on
MDSC. In preclinical model of colon cancer the metronomic CTX
administration in combination with gemcitabine mitigated Tregand PMN-MDSC-mediated immunosuppression, increased intratumoral IFN-␥ production and triggered anti-tumor immunity in
vivo [131]. In clinical studies, however, CTX in combination with
doxorubicin increased the number of circulating, immature MDSC
(Lin−/Lo , HLA DR− , CD33+ CD11b+ ) in newly diagnosed solid tumor
patients [132]. However, it should be considered that in this study
the patients were also receiving G-CSF, which might affect the systemic accumulation of myeloid cells independently from tumor
[132].
Clinical data suggest that the activity of novel targeted therapies might also affect myelomonocytic cells in cancer patients.
For example sunitinib, a multi-kinase inhibitor acting on multiple
pathways, including VEGFR and c-kit signaling, induced a strong
reduction in CD33+ /HLA-DR− M-MDSC in renal cell cancer (RCC)
patients, even if no correlation between MDSC levels and tumor
burden was observed [133]. One cycle of bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody directed against VEGF-A, was sufﬁcient to decrease
immature myeloid cells (CD45+ lin− HLA-DR− ) and increase DC frequency in the blood of lung, breast and colorectal cancer patients
[134]. However, in RCC patients, bevacizumab alone had no effect
on MDSC levels, whereas an increase in circulating MDSC was
observed after addition of IL-2 to bevacizumab regimen; this
discrepancy could be attributed to tumor burden, an important
variable, since RCC patients usually receive anti-VEGF therapy for
advanced tumors, normally associated with higher MDSC levels
[135]. The treatment of melanoma patients with vemurafenib, a
highly speciﬁc inhibitor of mutant B-RAF V600E, which constitutively activate the MAP kinase pathway and it is detected in about
60% of cutaneous melanomas, reduced the frequency of both CD14+
HLA-DR− MDSC and CD14− CD66b+ ARG-1+ MDSC [136].

In considering the interplay between chemotherapy and CD8+ T
cells, however, it must be pointed out that the combination of either
immune stimulators (vaccines, checkpoint inhibitors) or adoptive
cell transfer of effector T cells with chemotherapeutic agent has the
potential to affect negatively T lymphocyte expansion. A personalized peptide vaccine boosted immunological cellular and humoral
responses in unresectable pancreatic cancer patients and gemcitabine did not affect the immune reactivity [137]. However, while
resting T cells are spared by administration of a low dose gemcitabine regimen sufﬁcient to alter systemically the MDSC numbers
and functions, antigen-activated T cells can be killed in vivo by this
treatment following their adoptive transfer (Sasso et al., unpublished observations), notably narrowing the therapeutic window.
Therefore, the type of drug, dose and schedule must be carefully tested in clinical trials exploring the adjuvant activity of
chemotherapy on ACT.
5. Concluding remarks
The outcome of T cell therapy is determined by the quality of
the T cells and the immunosuppressive characteristics of the particular tumor microenvironment. Here we reviewed emerging and
conventional therapeutic strategies aimed at changing the tumor
microenvironment into a more favorable environment for T cell
inﬁltration and function (Fig. 1), to be used in conjunction with
ACT or checkpoint inhibitors. One obvious issue is the hierarchy
and the rationale for combining different treatments and moving them forward to clinical translation. Biomarkers are urgently
needed to guide this process. As we move deeper toward personalized medicine and better molecular proﬁling and classiﬁcation of
cancers, we should also make efforts to characterize the immune
context of tumor microenvironment. We need to deﬁne which are
the prevailing mechanisms restraining T cell effectiveness in different subgroups of patients. Tumors with different histology might

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A. Arina et al. / Seminars in Immunology 28 (2016) 54–63

share immune regulatory pathways, i.e. different mutations and
epigenetic modiﬁcations might shape the surrounding stroma in
converging ways. If this were the case, cancers from patients could
be classiﬁed according to their immune escape proﬁle and thus be
treated with the most appropriate therapeutic approaches.

[23]

[24]

Acknowledgments

[25]

This work was supported by grants from the Italian Ministry of
Health; Italian Ministry of Education (FIRB cup: B31J11000420001),
Universities, and Research; Italian Association for Cancer Research
(AIRC, grants 6599, 12182 and 14103) to V.B, as well as the Ludwig
Foundation (A.A.). L.C. is supported by a Cancer Research Institute
Irvingtonpostdoctoral fellowship.

[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]

References
[30]
[1] J.R. Brahmer, C.G. Drake, I. Wollner, J.D. Powderly, J. Picus, W.H. Sharfman,
et al., Phase I study of single-agent anti-programmed death-1 (MDX-1106)
in refractory solid tumors: safety, clinical activity, pharmacodynamics, and
immunologic correlates, J. Clin. Oncol. 28 (2010) 3167–3175.
[2] J.R. Brahmer, S.S. Tykodi, L.Q. Chow, W.J. Hwu, S.L. Topalian, P. Hwu, et al.,
Safety and activity of anti-PD-L1 antibody in patients with advanced cancer,
N. Engl. J. Med. 366 (2012) 2455–2465.
[3] O. Hamid, C. Robert, A. Daud, F.S. Hodi, W.J. Hwu, R. Kefford, et al., Safety and
tumor responses with lambrolizumab (anti-PD-1) in melanoma, N. Engl. J.
Med. 369 (2013) 134–144.
[4] S.L. Topalian, F.S. Hodi, J.R. Brahmer, S.N. Gettinger, D.C. Smith, D.F. McDermott, et al., Safety, activity, and immune correlates of anti-PD-1 antibody in
cancer, N. Engl. J. Med. 366 (2012) 2443–2454.
[5] M. Kalos, C.H. June, Adoptive T cell transfer for cancer immunotherapy in the
era of synthetic biology, Immunity 39 (2013) 49–60.
[6] C. Yee, The use of endogenous T cells for adoptive transfer, Immunol. Rev. 257
(2014) 250–263.
[7] S.A. Feldman, Y. Assadipour, I. Kriley, S.L. Goff, S.A. Rosenberg, Adoptive cell
therapy – tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes, T-cell receptors, and chimeric antigen receptors, Semin. Oncol. 42 (2015) 626–639.
[8] M. Sadelain, CAR therapy: the CD19 paradigm, J. Clin. Invest. 125 (2015)
3392–3400.
[9] A. Arina, V. Bronte, Myeloid-derived suppressor cell impact on endogenous
and adoptively transferred T cells, Curr. Opin. Immunol. 33 (2015) 120–125.
[10] T.F. Gajewski, The next hurdle in cancer immunotherapy: overcoming the
non-T-cell-inﬂamed tumor microenvironment, Semin. Oncol. 42 (2015)
663–671.
[11] D.H. Munn, V. Bronte, Immune suppressive mechanisms in the tumor
microenvironment, Curr. Opin. Immunol. 39 (2015) 1–6.
[12] A. Cipponi, G. Wieers, N. van Baren, P.G. Coulie, Tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes: apparently good for melanoma patients, but why? Cancer Immunol.
Immunother. 60 (2011) 1153–1160.
[13] J. Galon, A. Costes, F. Sanchez-Cabo, A. Kirilovsky, B. Mlecnik, C. Lagorce-Pages,
et al., Type, density, and location of immune cells within human colorectal
tumors predict clinical outcome, Science 313 (2006) 1960–1964.
[14] E. Sato, S.H. Olson, J. Ahn, B. Bundy, H. Nishikawa, F. Qian, et al., Intraepithelial
CD8+ tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes and a high CD8+/regulatory T cell ratio
are associated with favorable prognosis in ovarian cancer, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 102 (2005) 18538–18543.
[15] R.R. Ji, S.D. Chasalow, L. Wang, O. Hamid, H. Schmidt, J. Cogswell, et al., An
immune-active tumor microenvironment favors clinical response to ipilimumab, Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 61 (2012) 1019–1031.
[16] R.J. Buckanovich, A. Facciabene, S. Kim, F. Benencia, D. Sasaroli, K. Balint, et al.,
Endothelin B receptor mediates the endothelial barrier to T cell homing to
tumors and disables immune therapy, Nat. Med. 14 (2008) 28–36.
[17] S. Spranger, R. Bao, T.F. Gajewski, Melanoma-intrinsic beta-catenin signalling
prevents anti-tumour immunity, Nature 523 (2015) 231–235.
[18] R.R. Huang, J. Jalil, J.S. Economou, B. Chmielowski, R.C. Koya, S. Mok, et al.,
CTLA4 blockade induces frequent tumor inﬁltration by activated lymphocytes regardless of clinical responses in humans, Clin. Cancer Res. 17 (2011)
4101–4109.
[19] P.C. Tumeh, C.L. Harview, J.H. Yearley, I.P. Shintaku, E.J. Taylor, L. Robert, et al.,
PD-1 blockade induces responses by inhibiting adaptive immune resistance,
Nature 515 (2014) 568–571.
[20] M.A. Curran, W. Montalvo, H. Yagita, J.P. Allison, PD-1 and CTLA-4 combination
blockade expands inﬁltrating T cells and reduces regulatory T and myeloid
cells within B16 melanoma tumors, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107 (2010)
4275–4280.
[21] J. Larkin, V. Chiarion-Sileni, R. Gonzalez, J.J. Grob, C.L. Cowey, C.D. Lao,
et al., Combined nivolumab and ipilimumab or monotherapy in untreated
melanoma, N. Engl. J. Med. 373 (2015) 23–34.
[22] M.M. Berrien-Elliott, S.R. Jackson, J.M. Meyer, C.J. Rouskey, T.L. Nguyen, H.
Yagita, et al., Durable adoptive immunotherapy for leukemia produced by

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

61

manipulation of multiple regulatory pathways of CD8+ T-cell tolerance, Cancer Res. 73 (2013) 605–616.
S.J. Blake, A.L. Ching, T.J. Kenna, R. Galea, J. Large, H. Yagita, et al., Blockade of PD-1/PD-L1 promotes adoptive T-cell immunotherapy in a tolerogenic
environment, PLOS ONE 10 (2015) e0119483.
L.B. John, C. Devaud, C.P. Duong, C.S. Yong, P.A. Beavis, N.M. Haynes, et al.,
Anti-PD-1 antibody therapy potently enhances the eradication of established
tumors by gene-modiﬁed T cells, Clin. Cancer Res. 19 (2013) 5636–5646.
D.A. Mahvi, J.V. Meyers, A.J. Tatar, A. Contreras, M. Suresh, G.E. Leverson, et al.,
Ctla-4 blockade plus adoptive T-cell transfer promotes optimal melanoma
immunity in mice, J. Immunother. 38 (2015) 54–61.
E.K. Moon, R. Ranganathan, E. Eruslanov, S. Kim, K. Newick, S. O’Brien, et al.,
Blockade of programmed death 1 augments the ability of human T cells engineered to target NY-ESO-1 to control tumor growth after adoptive transfer,
Clin. Cancer Res. 22 (2016) 436–447.
W. Peng, C. Liu, C. Xu, Y. Lou, J. Chen, Y. Yang, et al., PD-1 blockade enhances
T-cell migration to tumors by elevating IFN-gamma inducible chemokines,
Cancer Res. 72 (2012) 5209–5218.
P. Sharma, J.P. Allison, The future of immune checkpoint therapy, Science 348
(2015) 56–61.
L. Chen, X. Han, Anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy of human cancer: past, present, and
future, J. Clin. Invest. 125 (2015) 3384–3391.
M.C. Dieu-Nosjean, J. Goc, N.A. Giraldo, C. Sautes-Fridman, W.H. Fridman, Tertiary lymphoid structures in cancer and beyond, Trends Immunol. 35 (2014)
571–580.
D. Coppola, M. Nebozhyn, F. Khalil, H. Dai, T. Yeatman, A. Loboda, et al., Unique
ectopic lymph node-like structures present in human primary colorectal carcinoma are identiﬁed by immune gene array proﬁling, Am. J. Pathol. 179
(2011) 37–45.
L. de Chaisemartin, J. Goc, D. Damotte, P. Validire, P. Magdeleinat, M. Alifano,
et al., Characterization of chemokines and adhesion molecules associated
with T cell presence in tertiary lymphoid structures in human lung cancer,
Cancer Res. 71 (2011) 6391–6399.
M.C. Dieu-Nosjean, M. Antoine, C. Danel, D. Heudes, M. Wislez, V. Poulot,
et al., Long-term survival for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer with intratumoral lymphoid structures, J. Clin. Oncol. 26 (2008)
4410–4417.
L. Maldonado, J.E. Teague, M.P. Morrow, I. Jotova, T.C. Wu, C. Wang, et al., Intramuscular therapeutic vaccination targeting HPV16 induces T cell responses
that localize in mucosal lesions, Sci. Transl. Med. 6 (2014) 221ra213.
J. Goc, C. Germain, T.K. Vo-Bourgais, A. Lupo, C. Klein, S. Knockaert, et al.,
Dendritic cells in tumor-associated tertiary lymphoid structures signal a Th1
cytotoxic immune contexture and license the positive prognostic value of
inﬁltrating CD8+ T cells, Cancer Res. 74 (2014) 705–715.
E.R. Lutz, A.A. Wu, E. Bigelow, R. Sharma, G. Mo, K. Soares, et al., Immunotherapy converts nonimmunogenic pancreatic tumors into immunogenic foci of
immune regulation, Cancer Immunol. Res. 2 (2014) 616–631.
J.D. Shields, I.C. Kourtis, A.A. Tomei, J.M. Roberts, M.A. Swartz, Induction
of lymphoidlike stroma and immune escape by tumors that express the
chemokine CCL21, Science 328 (2010) 749–752.
C. Gu-Trantien, S. Loi, S. Garaud, C. Equeter, M. Libin, A. de Wind, et al., CD4(+)
follicular helper T cell inﬁltration predicts breast cancer survival, J. Clin. Invest.
123 (2013) 2873–2892.
Y. Wang, M. Zhu, M. Miller, Y.X. Fu, Immunoregulation by tumor
necrosis factor superfamily member LIGHT, Immunol. Rev. 229 (2009)
232–243.
Y. Iwai, M. Ishida, Y. Tanaka, T. Okazaki, T. Honjo, N. Minato, Involvement
of PD-L1 on tumor cells in the escape from host immune system and tumor
immunotherapy by PD-L1 blockade, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99 (2002)
12293–12297.
P. Yu, Y. Lee, W. Liu, R.K. Chin, J. Wang, Y. Wang, et al., Priming of naive T
cells inside tumors leads to eradication of established tumors, Nat. Immunol.
5 (2004) 141–149.
P. Yu, Y. Lee, Y. Wang, X. Liu, S. Auh, T.F. Gajewski, et al., Targeting the primary tumor to generate CTL for the effective eradication of spontaneous
metastases, J. Immunol. 179 (2007) 1960–1968.
J. Kim, W.A. Li, Y. Choi, S.A. Lewin, C.S. Verbeke, G. Dranoff, et al., Injectable,
spontaneously assembling, inorganic scaffolds modulate immune cells in vivo
and increase vaccine efﬁcacy, Nat. Biotechnol. 33 (2015) 64–72.
S.B. Stephan, A.M. Taber, I. Jileaeva, E.P. Pegues, C.L. Sentman, M.T. Stephan,
Biopolymer implants enhance the efﬁcacy of adoptive T-cell therapy, Nat.
Biotechnol. 33 (2015) 97–101.
R. Barreira da Silva, M.E. Laird, N. Yatim, L. Fiette, M.A. Ingersoll, M.L. Albert,
Dipeptidylpeptidase 4 inhibition enhances lymphocyte trafﬁcking, improving both naturally occurring tumor immunity and immunotherapy, Nat.
Immunol. 16 (2015) 850–858.
A. Ene-Obong, A.J. Clear, J. Watt, J. Wang, R. Fatah, J.C. Riches, et al., Activated
pancreatic stellate cells sequester CD8+ T cells to reduce their inﬁltration of
the juxtatumoral compartment of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Gastroenterology 145 (2013) 1121–1132.
M.C. Poznansky, I.T. Olszak, R. Foxall, R.H. Evans, A.D. Luster, D.T. Scadden,
Active movement of T cells away from a chemokine, Nat. Med. 6 (2000)
543–548.
G.T. Motz, S.P. Santoro, L.P. Wang, T. Garrabrant, R.R. Lastra, I.S. Hagemann,
et al., Tumor endothelium FasL establishes a selective immune barrier promoting tolerance in tumors, Nat. Med. 20 (2014) 607–615.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

62

A. Arina et al. / Seminars in Immunology 28 (2016) 54–63

[49] A. Johansson, J. Hamzah, C.J. Payne, R. Ganss, Tumor-targeted TNFalpha stabilizes tumor vessels and enhances active immunotherapy, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 109 (2012) 7841–7846.
[50] U. Fiedler, Y. Reiss, M. Scharpfenecker, V. Grunow, S. Koidl, G. Thurston, et al.,
Angiopoietin-2 sensitizes endothelial cells to TNF-alpha and has a crucial role
in the induction of inﬂammation, Nat. Med. 12 (2006) 235–239.
[51] B. Li, A.S. Lalani, T.C. Harding, B. Luan, K. Koprivnikar, G. Huan Tu, et al., Vascular endothelial growth factor blockade reduces intratumoral regulatory T
cells and enhances the efﬁcacy of a GM-CSF-secreting cancer immunotherapy,
Clin. Cancer Res. 12 (2006) 6808–6816.
[52] Y. Huang, J. Yuan, E. Righi, W.S. Kamoun, M. Ancukiewicz, J. Nezivar, et al.,
Vascular normalizing doses of antiangiogenic treatment reprogram the
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and enhance immunotherapy, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109 (2012) 17561–17566.
[53] R.K. Shrimali, Z. Yu, M.R. Theoret, D. Chinnasamy, N.P. Restifo, S.A. Rosenberg,
Antiangiogenic agents can increase lymphocyte inﬁltration into tumor and
enhance the effectiveness of adoptive immunotherapy of cancer, Cancer Res.
70 (2010) 6171–6180.
[54] S. Ugel, F. De Sanctis, S. Mandruzzato, V. Bronte, Tumor-induced myeloid
deviation: when myeloid-derived suppressor cells meet tumor-associated
macrophages, J. Clin. Invest. 125 (2015) 3365–3376.
[55] Z. Fridlender, G. Buchlis, V. Kapoor, G. Cheng, J. Sun, S. Singhal, et al., CCL2
blockade augments cancer immunotherapy, Cancer Res. 70 (2010) 109–118.
[56] Z.G. Fridlender, V. Kapoor, G. Buchlis, G. Cheng, J. Sun, L.C. Wang, et al., Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 blockade inhibits lung cancer tumor growth
by altering macrophage phenotype and activating CD8+ cells, Am. J. Respir.
Cell Mol. Biol. 44 (2011) 230–237.
[57] S. Ugel, E. Peranzoni, G. Desantis, M. Chioda, S. Walter, T. Weinschenk, et al.,
Immune tolerance to tumor antigens occurs in a specialized environment of
the spleen, Cell Rep. (2012).
[58] K.J. Pienta, J.P. Machiels, D. Schrijvers, B. Alekseev, M. Shkolnik, S.J. Crabb,
et al., Phase 2 study of carlumab (CNTO 888), a human monoclonal antibody against CC-chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2), in metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer, Investig. New Drugs 31 (2013) 760–768.
[59] S.K. Sandhu, K. Papadopoulos, P.C. Fong, A. Patnaik, C. Messiou, D. Olmos,
et al., A ﬁrst-in-human, ﬁrst-in-class, phase I study of carlumab (CNTO 888), a
human monoclonal antibody against CC-chemokine ligand 2 in patients with
solid tumors, Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 71 (2013) 1041–1050.
[60] L. Bonapace, M.M. Coissieux, J. Wyckoff, K.D. Mertz, Z. Varga, T. Junt, et al., Cessation of CCL2 inhibition accelerates breast cancer metastasis by promoting
angiogenesis, Nature 515 (2014) 130–133.
[61] F. Leuschner, P. Dutta, R. Gorbatov, T.I. Novobrantseva, J.S. Donahoe, G.
Courties, et al., Therapeutic siRNA silencing in inﬂammatory monocytes in
mice, Nat. Biotechnol. 29 (2011) 1005–1010.
[62] B. Molon, S. Ugel, F. Del Pozzo, C. Soldani, S. Zilio, D. Avella, et al., Chemokine
nitration prevents intratumoral inﬁltration of antigen-speciﬁc T cells, J. Exp.
Med. 208 (2011) 1949–1962.
[63] S.J. Priceman, J.L. Sung, Z. Shaposhnik, J.B. Burton, A.X. Torres-Collado, D.L.
Moughon, et al., Targeting distinct tumor-inﬁltrating myeloid cells by inhibiting CSF-1 receptor: combating tumor evasion of antiangiogenic therapy,
Blood 115 (2010) 1461–1471.
[64] S.M. Pyonteck, L. Akkari, A.J. Schuhmacher, R.L. Bowman, L. Sevenich, D.F.
Quail, et al., CSF-1R inhibition alters macrophage polarization and blocks
glioma progression, Nat. Med. 19 (2013) 1264–1272.
[65] J. Xu, J. Escamilla, S. Mok, J. David, S. Priceman, B. West, et al., CSF1R signaling
blockade stanches tumor-inﬁltrating myeloid cells and improves the efﬁcacy
of radiotherapy in prostate cancer, Cancer Res. 73 (2013) 2782–2794.
[66] C.H. Ries, M.A. Cannarile, S. Hoves, J. Benz, K. Wartha, V. Runza, et al., Targeting
tumor-associated macrophages with anti-CSF-1R antibody reveals a strategy
for cancer therapy, Cancer Cell 25 (2014) 846–859.
[67] S. Spranger, R.M. Spaapen, Y. Zha, J. Williams, Y. Meng, T.T. Ha, et al.,
Up-regulation of PD-L1, IDO, and Tregs in the melanoma tumor microenvironment is driven by CD8+ T cells, Sci. Transl. Med. 5 (2013) 200ra116.
[68] R.B. Holmgaard, D. Zamarin, D.H. Munn, J.D. Wolchok, J.P. Allison, Indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase is a critical resistance mechanism in antitumor T cell
immunotherapy targeting CTLA-4, J. Exp. Med. 210 (2013) 1389–1402.
[69] D.A. Wainwright, A.L. Chang, M. Dey, I.V. Balyasnikova, C.K. Kim, A. Tobias,
et al., Durable therapeutic efﬁcacy utilizing combinatorial blockade against
IDO, CTLA-4, and PD-L1 in mice with brain tumors, Clin. Cancer Res. 20 (2014)
5290–5301.
[70] S. Spranger, H.K. Koblish, B. Horton, P.A. Scherle, R. Newton, T.F. Gajewski,
Mechanism of tumor rejection with doublets of CTLA-4, PD-1/PD-L1, or IDO
blockade involves restored IL-2 production and proliferation of CD8(+) T cells
directly within the tumor microenvironment, J. Immunother. Cancer 2 (2014)
3.
[71] S. Ninomiya, N. Narala, L. Huye, S. Yagyu, B. Savoldo, G. Dotti, et al., Tumor
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) inhibits CD19-CAR T cells and is downregulated by lymphodepleting drugs, Blood 125 (2015) 3905–3916.
[72] C. Feig, J.O. Jones, M. Kraman, R.J. Wells, A. Deonarine, D.S. Chan, et al., Targeting CXCL12 from FAP-expressing carcinoma-associated ﬁbroblasts synergizes
with anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy in pancreatic cancer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 110 (2013) 20212–20217.
[73] E.W. Roberts, A. Deonarine, J.O. Jones, A.E. Denton, C. Feig, S.K. Lyons, et al.,
Depletion of stromal cells expressing ﬁbroblast activation protein-alpha from
skeletal muscle and bone marrow results in cachexia and anemia, J. Exp. Med.
210 (2013) 1137–1151.

[74] M.H. Sherman, R.T. Yu, D.D. Engle, N. Ding, A.R. Atkins, H. Tiriac, et al., Vitamin D receptor-mediated stromal reprogramming suppresses pancreatitis
and enhances pancreatic cancer therapy, Cell 159 (2014) 80–93.
[75] M.S. Diamond, M. Kinder, H. Matsushita, M. Mashayekhi, G.P. Dunn, J.M.
Archambault, et al., Type I interferon is selectively required by dendritic cells
for immune rejection of tumors, J. Exp. Med. 208 (2011) 1989–2003.
[76] E.Y. Woo, M.B. Fuertes, L. Corrales, S. Spranger, M.J. Furdyna, M.Y.K. Leung,
et al., Innate immune sensing of immunogenic tumors via the host STING
pathway, Immunity (2014).
[77] M.B. Fuertes, A.K. Kacha, J. Kline, S.R. Woo, D.M. Kranz, K.M. Murphy, et al.,
Host type I IFN signals are required for antitumor CD8+ T cell responses
through CD8{alpha}+ dendritic cells, J. Exp. Med. 208 (2011) 2005–2016.
[78] L. Deng, H. Liang, M. Xu, X. Yang, B. Burnette, A. Arina, et al., Radiationtriggered cytosolic DNA sensing pathway bridges type I interferon-dependent
innate and adaptive immune responses, Immunity (2014).
[79] T.N. Schumacher, R.D. Schreiber, Neoantigens in cancer immunotherapy, Science 348 (2015) 69–74.
[80] L. Corrales, L.H. Glickman, S.M. McWhirter, D.B. Kanne, K.E. Sivick, G.E. Katibah, et al., Direct activation of STING in the tumor microenvironment leads
to potent and systemic tumor regression and immunity, Cell Rep. 11 (2015)
1018–1030.
[81] N. Iida, A. Dzutsev, C.A. Stewart, L. Smith, N. Bouladoux, R.A. Weingarten, et al.,
Commensal bacteria control cancer response to therapy by modulating the
tumor microenvironment, Science 342 (2013) 967–970.
[82] M. Vetizou, J.M. Pitt, R. Daillere, P. Lepage, N. Waldschmitt, C. Flament, et al.,
Anticancer immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade relies on the gut microbiota,
Science (2015).
[83] A. Sivan, L. Corrales, N. Hubert, J.B. Williams, K. Aquino-Michaels, Z.M. Earley, et al., Commensal Biﬁdobacterium promotes antitumor immunity and
facilitates anti-PD-L1 efﬁcacy, Science (2015).
[84] B. Burnette, R.R. Weichselbaum, The immunology of ablative radiation, Semin.
Radiat. Oncol. 25 (2015) 40–45.
[85] L. Deng, H. Liang, S. Fu, R.R. Weichselbaum, Y.X. Fu, From DNA damage to
nucleic acid sensing: a strategy to enhance radiation therapy, Clin. Cancer
Res. 22 (2016) 20–25.
[86] A.B. Sharabi, M. Lim, T.L. DeWeese, C.G. Drake, Radiation and checkpoint
blockade immunotherapy: radiosensitisation and potential mechanisms of
synergy, Lancet Oncol. 16 (2015) e498–e509.
[87] B.C. Burnette, H. Liang, Y. Lee, L. Chlewicki, N.N. Khodarev, R.R. Weichselbaum,
et al., The efﬁcacy of radiotherapy relies upon induction of type i interferondependent innate and adaptive immunity, Cancer Res. 71 (2011) 2488–2496.
[88] L. Galluzzi, A. Buque, O. Kepp, L. Zitvogel, G. Kroemer, Immunological effects
of conventional chemotherapy and targeted anticancer agents, Cancer Cell 28
(2015) 690–714.
[89] A.A. Lugade, J.P. Moran, S.A. Gerber, R.C. Rose, J.G. Frelinger, E.M. Lord, Local
radiation therapy of B16 melanoma tumors increases the generation of tumor
antigen-speciﬁc effector cells that trafﬁc to the tumor, J. Immunol. 174 (2005)
7516–7523.
[90] A.A. Lugade, E.W. Sorensen, S.A. Gerber, J.P. Moran, J.G. Frelinger, E.M. Lord,
Radiation-induced IFN-gamma production within the tumor microenvironment inﬂuences antitumor immunity, J. Immunol. 180 (2008) 3132–3139.
[91] F. Klug, H. Prakash, P.E. Huber, T. Seibel, N. Bender, N. Halama, et al., Low-dose
irradiation programs macrophage differentiation to an iNOS(+)/M1 phenotype that orchestrates effective T cell immunotherapy, Cancer Cell 24 (2013)
589–602.
[92] J. Handschel, F.J. Prott, C. Sunderkotter, D. Metze, U. Meyer, U. Joos, Irradiation
induces increase of adhesion molecules and accumulation of beta2-integrinexpressing cells in humans, Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 45 (1999) 475–481.
[93] R. Ganss, E. Ryschich, E. Klar, B. Arnold, G.J. Hammerling, Combination of T-cell
therapy and trigger of inﬂammation induces remodeling of the vasculature
and tumor eradication, Cancer Res. 62 (2002) 1462–1470.
[94] S. Matsumura, B. Wang, N. Kawashima, S. Braunstein, M. Badura, T.O.
Cameron, et al., Radiation-induced CXCL16 release by breast cancer cells
attracts effector T cells, J. Immunol. 181 (2008) 3099–3107.
[95] A. Gupta, H.C. Probst, V. Vuong, A. Landshammer, S. Muth, H. Yagita, et al.,
Radiotherapy promotes tumor-speciﬁc effector CD8+ T cells via dendritic cell
activation, J. Immunol. 189 (2012) 558–566.
[96] H. Liang, L. Deng, S. Chmura, B. Burnette, N. Liadis, T. Darga, et al., Radiationinduced equilibrium is a balance between tumor cell proliferation and T cellmediated killing, J. Immunol. 190 (2013) 5874–5881.
[97] A. Filatenkov, J. Baker, A.M. Mueller, J. Kenkel, G.O. Ahn, S. Dutt, et al., Ablative
tumor radiation can change the tumor immune cell microenvironment to
induce durable complete remissions, Clin. Cancer Res. 21 (2015) 3727–3739.
[98] E.A. Reits, J.W. Hodge, C.A. Herberts, T.A. Groothuis, M. Chakraborty, E.K.
Wansley, et al., Radiation modulates the peptide repertoire, enhances MHC
class I expression, and induces successful antitumor immunotherapy, J. Exp.
Med. 203 (2006) 1259–1271.
[99] S. Wan, S. Pestka, R.G. Jubin, Y.L. Lyu, Y.C. Tsai, L.F. Liu, Chemotherapeutics and
radiation stimulate MHC class I expression through elevated interferon-beta
signaling in breast cancer cells, PLOS ONE 7 (2012) e32542.
[100] A.D. Santin, P.L. Hermonat, A. Ravaggi, M. Chiriva-Internati, S. Pecorelli, G.P.
Parham, Radiation-enhanced expression of E6/E7 transforming oncogenes of
human papillomavirus-16 in human cervical carcinoma, Cancer 83 (1998)
2346–2352.
[101] A. Sharma, B. Bode, R.H. Wenger, K. Lehmann, A.A. Sartori, H. Moch,
et al., gamma-Radiation promotes immunological recognition of cancer cells

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A. Arina et al. / Seminars in Immunology 28 (2016) 54–63

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109]
[110]

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]
[120]

through increased expression of cancer-testis antigens in vitro and in vivo,
PLOS ONE 6 (2011) e28217.
M. Chakraborty, S.I. Abrams, C.N. Coleman, K. Camphausen, J. Schlom, J.W.
Hodge, External beam radiation of tumors alters phenotype of tumor cells
to render them susceptible to vaccine-mediated T-cell killing, Cancer Res. 64
(2004) 4328–4337.
S.R. Gameiro, M.L. Jammeh, M.M. Wattenberg, K.Y. Tsang, S. Ferrone, J.W.
Hodge, Radiation-induced immunogenic modulation of tumor enhances antigen processing and calreticulin exposure, resulting in enhanced T-cell killing,
Oncotarget 5 (2014) 403–416.
B. Zhang, N.A. Bowerman, J.K. Salama, H. Schmidt, M.T. Spiotto, A. Schietinger,
et al., Induced sensitization of tumor stroma leads to eradication of established cancer by T cells, J. Exp. Med. 204 (2007) 49–55.
S. Demaria, N. Kawashima, A.M. Yang, M.L. Devitt, J.S. Babb, J.P. Allison, et al.,
Immune-mediated inhibition of metastases after treatment with local radiation and CTLA-4 blockade in a mouse model of breast cancer, Clin. Cancer
Res. 11 (2005) 728–734.
C. Twyman-Saint Victor, A.J. Rech, A. Maity, R. Rengan, K.E. Pauken, E. Stelekati,
et al., Radiation and dual checkpoint blockade activate non-redundant
immune mechanisms in cancer, Nature 520 (2015) 373–377.
L. Deng, H. Liang, B. Burnette, M. Beckett, T. Darga, R.R. Weichselbaum,
et al., Irradiation and anti-PD-L1 treatment synergistically promote antitumor
immunity in mice, J. Clin. Invest. 124 (2014) 687–695.
S.J. Dovedi, A.L. Adlard, G. Lipowska-Bhalla, C. McKenna, S. Jones, E.J. Cheadle,
et al., Acquired resistance to fractionated radiotherapy can be overcome by
concurrent PD-L1 blockade, Cancer Res. 74 (2014) 5458–5468.
C.S. Hinrichs, S.A. Rosenberg, Exploiting the curative potential of adoptive
T-cell therapy for cancer, Immunol. Rev. 257 (2014) 56–71.
L. Gattinoni, S.E. Finkelstein, C.A. Klebanoff, P.A. Antony, D.C. Palmer, P.J.
Spiess, et al., Removal of homeostatic cytokine sinks by lymphodepletion
enhances the efﬁcacy of adoptively transferred tumor-speciﬁc CD8+ T cells,
J. Exp. Med. 202 (2005) 907–912.
J. Kline, I.E. Brown, Y.Y. Zha, C. Blank, J. Strickler, H. Wouters, et al., Homeostatic
proliferation plus regulatory T-cell depletion promotes potent rejection of
B16 melanoma, Clin. Cancer Res. 14 (2008) 3156–3167.
C.M. Paulos, C. Wrzesinski, A. Kaiser, C.S. Hinrichs, M. Chieppa, L. Cassard,
et al., Microbial translocation augments the function of adoptively transferred
self/tumor-speciﬁc CD8+ T cells via TLR4 signaling, J. Clin. Invest. 117 (2007)
2197–2204.
C. Wrzesinski, C.M. Paulos, A. Kaiser, P. Muranski, D.C. Palmer, L. Gattinoni,
et al., Increased intensity lymphodepletion enhances tumor treatment efﬁcacy of adoptively transferred tumor-speciﬁc T cells, J. Immunother. 33 (2010)
1–7.
M.E. Dudley, J.C. Yang, R. Sherry, M.S. Hughes, R. Royal, U. Kammula, et al.,
Adoptive cell therapy for patients with metastatic melanoma: evaluation of
intensive myeloablative chemoradiation preparative regimens, J. Clin. Oncol.
26 (2008) 5233–5239.
L. Bracci, G. Schiavoni, A. Sistigu, F. Belardelli, Immune-based mechanisms of
cytotoxic chemotherapy: implications for the design of novel and rationalebased combined treatments against cancer, Cell. Death Diff. 21 (2014) 15–25.
L. Zitvogel, L. Galluzzi, M.J. Smyth, G. Kroemer, Mechanism of action of conventional and targeted anticancer therapies: reinstating immunosurveillance,
Immunity 39 (2013) 74–88.
E. Vacchelli, Y. Ma, E.E. Baracco, A. Sistigu, D.P. Enot, F. Pietrocola, et al.,
Chemotherapy-induced antitumor immunity requires formyl peptide receptor 1, Science (2015).
A. Sistigu, T. Yamazaki, E. Vacchelli, K. Chaba, D.P. Enot, J. Adam, et al., Cancer
cell-autonomous contribution of type I interferon signaling to the efﬁcacy of
chemotherapy, Nat. Med. (2014).
A. Mantovani, P. Allavena, The interaction of anticancer therapies with tumorassociated macrophages, J. Exp. Med. 212 (2015) 435–445.
E. Suzuki, V. Kapoor, A.S. Jassar, L.R. Kaiser, S.M. Albelda, Gemcitabine
selectively eliminates splenic Gr-1+/CD11b+ myeloid suppressor cells in
tumor-bearing animals and enhances antitumor immune activity, Clin. Cancer Res. 11 (2005) 6713–6721.

63

[121] H.K. Le, L. Graham, E. Cha, J.K. Morales, M.H. Manjili, H.D. Bear, Gemcitabine
directly inhibits myeloid derived suppressor cells in BALB/c mice bearing 4T1
mammary carcinoma and augments expansion of T cells from tumor-bearing
mice, Int. Immunopharmacol. 9 (2009) 900–909.
[122] K. Tomihara, H. Fuse, W. Heshiki, R. Takei, B. Zhang, N. Arai, et al., Gemcitabine
chemotherapy induces phenotypic alterations of tumor cells that facilitate
antitumor T cell responses in a mouse model of oral cancer, Oral Oncol. 50
(2014) 457–467.
[123] J. Vincent, G. Mignot, F. Chalmin, S. Ladoire, M. Bruchard, A. Chevriaux, et al.,
5-Fluorouracil selectively kills tumor-associated myeloid-derived suppressor
cells resulting in enhanced T cell-dependent antitumor immunity, Cancer Res.
70 (2010) 3052–3061.
[124] M. Bruchard, G. Mignot, V. Derangere, F. Chalmin, A. Chevriaux, F. Vegran,
et al., Chemotherapy-triggered cathepsin B release in myeloid-derived suppressor cells activates the Nlrp3 inﬂammasome and promotes tumor growth,
Nat. Med. 19 (2013) 57–64.
[125] G. Germano, R. Frapolli, C. Belgiovine, A. Anselmo, S. Pesce, M. Liguori, et al.,
Role of macrophage targeting in the antitumor activity of trabectedin, Cancer
Cell 23 (2013) 249–262.
[126] J.M. Haverkamp, A.M. Smith, R. Weinlich, C.P. Dillon, J.E. Qualls, G. Neale, et al.,
Myeloid-derived suppressor activity is mediated by monocytic lineages maintained by continuous inhibition of extrinsic and intrinsic death pathways,
Immunity 41 (2014) 947–959.
[127] K. Kim, A.D. Skora, Z. Li, Q. Liu, A.J. Tam, R.L. Blosser, et al., Eradication of
metastatic mouse cancers resistant to immune checkpoint blockade by suppression of myeloid-derived cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111 (2014)
11774–11779.
[128] J. Chen, X. Huang, G. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Chen, H. Song, Preconditioning chemotherapy with cisplatin enhances the antitumor activity of
cytokine-induced killer cells in a murine melanoma model, Cancer Biother.
Radiopharmaceut. 27 (2012) 210–220.
[129] H. Naiditch, M.R. Shurin, G.V. Shurin, Targeting myeloid regulatory
cells in cancer by chemotherapeutic agents, Immunol. Res. 50 (2011)
276–285.
[130] K.N. Kodumudi, K. Woan, D.L. Gilvary, E. Sahakian, S. Wei, J.Y. Djeu, A novel
chemoimmunomodulating property of docetaxel: suppression of myeloidderived suppressor cells in tumor bearers, Clin. Cancer Res. 16 (2010)
4583–4594.
[131] M. Tongu, N. Harashima, H. Monma, T. Inao, T. Yamada, H. Kawauchi, et al.,
Metronomic chemotherapy with low-dose cyclophosphamide plus gemcitabine can induce anti-tumor T cell immunity in vivo, Cancer Immunol.
Immunother. 62 (2013) 383–391.
[132] C.M. Diaz-Montero, M.L. Salem, M.I. Nishimura, E. Garrett-Mayer, D.J. Cole,
A.J. Montero, Increased circulating myeloid-derived suppressor cells correlate
with clinical cancer stage, metastatic tumor burden, and doxorubicincyclophosphamide chemotherapy, Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 58 (2009)
49–59.
[133] J.S. Ko, A.H. Zea, B.I. Rini, J.L. Ireland, P. Elson, P. Cohen, et al., Sunitinib mediates reversal of myeloid-derived suppressor cell accumulation in renal cell
carcinoma patients, Clin. Cancer Res. 15 (2009) 2148–2157.
[134] T. Osada, G. Chong, R. Tansik, T. Hong, N. Spector, R. Kumar, et al.,
The effect of anti-VEGF therapy on immature myeloid cell and dendritic cells in cancer patients, Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 57 (2008)
1115–1124.
[135] P.C. Rodriguez, M.S. Ernstoff, C. Hernandez, M. Atkins, J. Zabaleta, R. Sierra,
et al., Arginase I-producing myeloid-derived suppressor cells in renal cell carcinoma are a subpopulation of activated granulocytes, Cancer Res. 69 (2009)
1553–1560.
[136] B. Schilling, A. Sucker, K. Griewank, F. Zhao, B. Weide, A. Gorgens, et al., Vemurafenib reverses immunosuppression by myeloid derived suppressor cells,
Int. J. Cancer 133 (2013) 1653–1663.
[137] H. Yanagimoto, T. Mine, K. Yamamoto, S. Satoi, N. Terakawa, K. Takahashi,
et al., Immunological evaluation of personalized peptide vaccination with
gemcitabine for pancreatic cancer, Cancer Sci. 98 (2007) 605–611.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

