The role of immunotherapy in in vitro
fertilization: a guideline
Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama

Adjuvant immunotherapy treatments in in vitro fertilization (IVF) aim to improve the outcome of assisted reproductive technology
(ART) in both the general ART population as well as subgroups such as patients with recurrent miscarriage or implantation failure.
The purpose of this guideline is to evaluate the role of immunomodulating therapy in ART. Unfortunately, many of the evaluated therapies lack robust evidence from well-designed adequately powered randomized controlled trials to support their use. Immunotherapies
reviewed in the present document are either not associated with improved live-birth outcome in IVF or have been insufﬁciently studied
to make deﬁnitive recommendations. (Fertil SterilÒ 2018;110:387–400. Ó2018 by American Society for Reproductive Medicine.)
Discuss: You can discuss this article with its authors and with other readers at https://www.fertstertdialog.com/users/16110fertility-and-sterility/posts/33034-26277

S

uccessful outcomes in assisted
reproductive technology (ART)
cycles depend on the developmental competence of transferred embryo(s) and endometrial receptivity.
Multiple factors are believed to be
involved in endometrial receptivity,
including the hormonal preparation of
the endometrium, contractility of the
myometrium, and the interaction between the embryo and endometrium,
the latter of which inherently involves
immunological mechanisms. In an
effort to improve outcomes in ART cycles in general, and in patients with
recurrent implantation failure and/or
pregnancy loss, aduvant immunotherapies have been introduced into
in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment cycles. The rationale behind the use of
these therapies is that they may correct
an immunological imbalance resulting
in improved and sustained implantation of the developing embryo, ultimately leading to improved live-birth
outcome. While some of these medications (e.g., aspirin and corticosteroids)
have been used for many years and
are relatively low cost, others (e.g.,

intravenous fat emulsions and granulocyte colony–stimulating factor [GCSF]) are newer, of higher cost, and
with risks that have been poorly characterized. It is imperative that physicians providing ART treatments have
a full understanding of the potential
risks and beneﬁts associated with
adjuvant immunotherapy in order to
appropriately
counsel
patients
regarding their use. In the absence of
well-designed adequately powered randomized controlled trials (RCTs), or
other methodologically rigorous quantitative assessment design studies, patients must be informed of uncertain
beneﬁts and risks (1). In some investigations, adjuvant immunotherapies
have been administered based on the
results of immunological testing. Given
the lack of a clear relationship between
immunophenotypes and ART outcomes, the use of immunological
testing in the general ART population
cannot be recommended (2, 3). The
present guideline is based on a
systematic review of the literature
regarding immunotherapy in IVF with
the goal of informing the practitioner

Received May 9, 2018; accepted May 10, 2018.
Document expiration date: 12/31/2023.
Disclosures/funding source: None.
Correspondence: Practice Committee, American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 1209 Montgomery Highway, Birmingham, Alabama 35216 (E-mail: ASRM@asrm.org).
Fertility and Sterility® Vol. 110, No. 3, August 2018 0015-0282/$36.00
Copyright ©2018 American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2018.05.009

about how to provide evidence-based
care.

LIMITATIONS OF THE
LITERATURE
Multiple challenges exist in interpreting
the literature related to immunotherapy
and IVF outcomes, which includes few
well-designed randomized studies.
Many of the cited investigations are
more than 20 years old, and their applicability to modern ART is uncertain.
Additionally, many of the investigations
are underpowered and/or address surrogate outcomes such as embryo development and clinical pregnancy rate rather
than live birth. Multiple investigations
also include combined treatment regimens rather than single-component
treatments, so it is difﬁcult to attribute
any change in outcome to a given treatment. Some of the investigated therapies
(e.g., aspirin) may have multiple mechanisms of action, such that an observed
effect may or may not be due to an
immunological mechanism. Finally,
many of the cited studies include
narrowly deﬁned populations based on
immunological testing which may not
be readily available and/or reproducible.

METHODS
This clinical practice guideline was
based on a systematic review of the
literature performed in the electronic

VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
387
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ASRM PAGES
database MEDLINE through PubMed on August 17, 2017. No
limit or ﬁlter was used for the time period covered or English
language, but articles were subsequently culled for English
language. This electronic search and examination of reference
lists from primary and review articles yielded 1,525 studies, of
which 96 studies were included.
A combination of the following medical subject headings or text words were used: abdominal pain/chemically
induced; acetylsalicylic acid; adalimumab; adjuvants,
immunologic; adrenocorticotropic hormone; adverse; adrenal cortex hormones; allogenic leukocyte immunization;
alloimmunization; antibodies, anticardiolipin; antibodies,
antinuclear; antibodies, antiphospholipid; anti-cardiolipin
antibody; antigens; anti-nuclear antibodies; anti-nuclear
antibody; antinuclear antibodies; antinuclear antibody;
antiphospholipid antibody; antiphospholipid antibodies;
antithyroid antibody; antithyroid antibodies; aspirin;
assisted reproduction; autoantibodies; corticosteroid/s;
corticotropin-releasing hormone; cost; cytokine; cytokines;
dexamethasone; drug costs; embryo implantation; embryo
transfer; Enbrel; estrogen/s; etanercept; fertility agents, female/adverse effects; fertilization in vitro/methods; ﬁlgrastim; G-CSF; glucocorticoid/s; GM-CSF; granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor; harm; HLA; HLA antigens; human leukocyte antigen; Humira; ICSI; IL-10; IL-17; IL-27;
immune modulatory; immune therapy; immunoglobulins,
intravenous; immunoglobulins/therapeutic use; immunologic tests; immunomodulation; immunomodulatory;
immunosuppression; immunotherapy; in vitro fertilisation;
in vitro fertilization; interleukin-10; interleukin-17;
interleukin-27; intracytoplasmic sperm injection; intrali-

pid; intralipid infusion; intrauterine insemination; intravenous immunoglobulin; intravenous immunoglobulins,
human; intravenous lipids; irritable bowel syndrome/chemically induced; IVF; IUI; killer cells, natural; leukocyte antibodies; leukocyte antibody; lupus anticoagulant; lupus
coagulation inhibitor; methylprednisolone; natural killer
cells; nausea/chemically induced; ovulation induction;
prednisone; progesterone; regulatory T cells; risk; safety;
sperm injections, intracytoplasmic; steroid/s; T cells; T regulatory cells; tacrolimus; Th1; Th1 cells; Th2; Th2 cells; thyroid peroxidase antibodies; thyroid peroxidase antibody;
TNF; transforming growth factor beta; Treg cells; tumor necrosis factor; tumour necrosis factor; tumor necrosis factoralpha; vomiting/chemically induced.
Initially, titles and abstracts of potentially relevant articles were screened and reviewed to develop inclusion/exclusion criteria. Only studies that met the inclusion criteria
were assessed in the ﬁnal analysis. Studies were eligible if
they met one of the following criteria: primary evidence (clinical trials) that assessed the effectiveness of a procedure correlated with an outcome measure (pregnancy, ovulation, or
live-birth rates); meta-analyses; and relevant articles from
bibliographies of identiﬁed articles (Table 1).
Four members of an independent task force reviewed
the full articles of all citations that potentially matched
the predeﬁned selection criteria. Final inclusion or exclusion decisions were made on examination of the articles
in full. Disagreements about inclusion among reviewers
were discussed and resolved by consensus or arbitration after consultation with an independent reviewer/
epidemiologist.

TABLE 1
Summary of inclusion/exclusion criteria.
Include
Level I and II studies, systematic reviews, meta-analyses
Human studies
English
Studies with a comparison group
Studies with a primary focus on IVF
Aspirin as monotherapy for IVF outcomes
Corticosteroids during ovarian stimulation
Peri-implantation corticosteroids
G-CSF and GM-CSF and embryo development, aneuploidy,
endometrial thickness, or IVF outcomes
Intravenous fat emulsions and IVF outcomes
IVIG and IVF outcomes
Adalimumab and IVF outcomes
Peripheral mononuclear cells and IVF outcomes
Seminal plasma and IVF outcomes
Antibody-free preparation of spermatozoa and IVF outcomes
Tacrolimus and IVF outcomes

Exclude
Level III studies: series, case reports, reviews, opinions, off topic
Animal studies
Non-English
Studies without a comparison group
Non-IVF fertility treatment
Agents that are both immunomodulating and have other
progestational effects
Anticardiolipin studies that focus on recurrent pregnancy loss
Anticoagulants
Antithyroid antibodies
DHEA
IUI
Metformin
OHSS
PCOS
Thyroid
Vasodilators
Uterine relaxants
Patients on immunomodulation therapy for known autoimmune
conditions (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis)
Progesterone (with mixed hormonal and immunological properties)
Hypertensive complications
Aspirin in combination with other therapies

Note: DHEA ¼ dehydroepiandrosterone; G-CSF ¼ granulocyte colony–stimulating factor; GM-CSF ¼ granulocyte/macrophage colony–stimulating factor; IUI ¼ intrauterine insemination; IVIG ¼
intravenous immunoglobulin; IVF ¼ in vitro fertilization; OHSS ¼ ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome; PCOS ¼ polycystic ovary syndrome.
ASRM. Immunotherapy and IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

388
VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
Level of Evidence
The level of the evidence was evaluated using the following
grading system and is assigned for each reference in the
bibliography:

Level I
 Systematic review of randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
 RCTs

Grade B: There is fair evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against. (From principally Level-II
studies of Good quality [Grade B])
Grade C: There is insufﬁcient evidence to support
the recommendations, either for or against. (From
Level-II studies of Low quality [Grade C], or when
there are conﬂicting data from studies of Good
quality)

Level II

Aspirin

 Systematic review of a combination of RCTs, controlled trials without randomization, and cohort studies
 Controlled trials without randomization
 Cohort studies
 Case-control studies

Aspirin has been investigated as a means to increase blood
ﬂow to the ovaries and thereby improve oocyte yield and/
or quality, and increase blood ﬂow to the uterus which
may improve endometrial thickness and receptivity (4, 5).
With theoretical mechanisms of action that could involve
both anti-inﬂammatory and anti-platelet activity, aspirin
has been investigated as an attractive potential adjuvant to
IVF.
Five RCTs investigating the use of aspirin in ART reported
outcomes for implantation rate. Four of these did not show a
beneﬁt of aspirin for implantation rate in IVF (6–9), while the
remaining trial (n¼149, aspirin group) did show a
signiﬁcantly improved implantation rate with aspirin use
(10). A retrospective cohort study also failed to demonstrate
a beneﬁt of aspirin for implantation rate, and found a
statistically signiﬁcantly higher fertilization rate in the
nonaspirin group (54.7% aspirin vs. 58.2% no aspirin,
respectively, P< .01) (11).
Nine RCTs reported an association between aspirin and
pregnancy rate in IVF; pregnancy rate was variably deﬁned.
Several studies deﬁned clinical pregnancy as presence of a
gestational sac (6, 12) or fetal cardiac activity (6,8–10,13),
while the remaining studies did not specify how pregnancy
was deﬁned (14–16). While a single RCT of 298 patients
undergoing IVF for tubal factor infertility showed a
signiﬁcantly improved pregnancy rate among women who
received low-dose aspirin (45% vs. 28%, P< .05) (10), eight
RCTs showed no beneﬁt of aspirin use for pregnancy rate in
ART (6,8,9,12–16). There was no beneﬁt of aspirin for
pregnancy rate in three cohort studies (11, 17, 18), while
two cohort studies showed a higher pregnancy rate with
aspirin use (19, 20).
Multiple RCTs have failed to demonstrate a beneﬁt of
aspirin for live-birth rate (13, 14, 16, 21) or ongoing
pregnancy rate (7) in ART, and there are no RCTs that
have shown an improved live-birth rate. There are three
retrospective analyses demonstrating an association with
aspirin and higher live-birth rate: 74.8% aspirin vs.
63.7% controls, P< .05; 27.2% aspirin vs. 23.2% controls
(odds ratio [OR] 1.2; conﬁdence interval [CI] 1.0–1.6);
and adjusted OR 1.48, CI 1.08–2.02, respectively (19, 20,
22). However, two other retrospective analyses published
around the same time failed to show an association with
live-birth rate and aspirin use (11, 18). Another more
recent study showed no beneﬁt for ongoing pregnancy
rate with aspirin (17).

Level III
 Descriptive studies, case series, case reports, letters,
nonsystematic reviews, opinions based on clinical experience, and reports of expert committees

Quality of Evidence
The quality of the evidence was evaluated using the following
grading system, adapted from the Johns Hopkins Nursing
Evidence-based Practice grading system, and is assigned for
each reference in the bibliography:

A: High Quality
 Consistent, generalizable results; sufﬁcient sample size for
the study design; adequate control; deﬁnitive conclusions;
consistent recommendations based on a comprehensive
literature review that includes thorough reference to scientiﬁc evidence

B: Good Quality
 Reasonably consistent results; sufﬁcient sample size for the
study design; some control; fairly deﬁnitive conclusions;
reasonably consistent recommendations based on a fairly
comprehensive literature review that includes some reference to scientiﬁc evidence

C: Low Quality or Major Flaws
 Little evidence with inconsistent results; insufﬁcient sample size for the study design; conclusions cannot be drawn

Strength of Recommendations
The entirety of the literature was then used to develop
recommendations based on the quality of the literature.
The strength of the recommendation was evaluated as
follows:
Grade A: There is good evidence to support the recommendations, either for or against.
(From consistent Level-I studies of High quality [Grade A])

VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
389
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ASRM PAGES
A meta-analysis of six RCTs comparing aspirin to placebo
or no treatment during IVF/intracytoplasmic sperm injection
(ICSI) found no beneﬁcial effect on pregnancy (risk ratio [RR]
1.09; 95% CI 0.92–1.29), live-birth rate per cycle (RR 0.87;
95% CI 0.57–1.34), or live-birth rate per embryo transfer
(ET) (RR 1.08; 95% CI 0.83–1.40) (23). Similarly, another
meta-analysis published the same year included seven trials
of participants undergoing controlled ovarian stimulation
(COS), IVF, or ICSI, and found no beneﬁt of aspirin compared
to placebo or no treatment for clinical pregnancy rate (RR
1.11; 95% CI 0.95–1.31) or live-birth rate (RR 0.94; 95% CI
0.64–1.39), although this study lacked power when studies
were pooled (24). In contrast, a meta-analysis of 10 RCTs,
including a reanalysis of a prior meta-analysis (23), showed
that aspirin may increase clinical pregnancy rates (ﬁxed effects RR 1.15; 95% CI 1.03–1.27), although there was a large
variation in results among included studies (25). A metaanalysis of 10 RCTs published a few years later found no
improvement in clinical pregnancy rate (pooled OR 0.86;
95% CI 0.69–1.1) or ongoing pregnancy rate (pooled OR
0.85; 95% CI 0.65–1.1) (26). A more recent meta-analysis of
17 RCTs comparing aspirin with no aspirin or placebo in
IVF/ICSI couples showed a higher pregnancy rate (OR 1.19;
95% CI 1.01–1.39) but did not show a beneﬁt for live-birth
rate (OR 1.08; 95% CI 0.90–1.29) (27). Most recently, a Cochrane systematic review of 13 low- to moderate-quality trials of subfertile women undergoing ART showed no beneﬁt of
aspirin in IVF for pregnancy (RR 1.03; 95% CI 0.91–1.17; 10
trials) or live-birth rates (RR 0.91; 95% CI 0.72–1.15; 3 trials)
(28).
Aspirin monotherapy has also been investigated for use in
speciﬁc populations undergoing IVF. Among recipients of
oocyte donation, low-dose aspirin improved implantation
rate but not live-birth rate in patients with a thin endometrium (16).
While aspirin is an inexpensive therapy with little overall
risk, studies do not demonstrate that it improves the success of
IVF. Therefore, its use is not recommended for use in the general IVF population. (See Supplemental Table 1, listing aspirin
dosing and/or timing and IVF outcomes.)

Summary Statements
 Given the lack of evidence to support improved IVF outcomes, there is good evidence to recommend against the
routine use of low-dose aspirin to improve the outcome
of live birth in ART cycles in the general population.
(From Level-I studies of Good and High quality). (Grade A).

Corticosteroids
During ovarian stimulation. Corticosteroids are steroid hormones produced in the adrenal cortex in response to adrenocorticotropic hormone from the anterior pituitary. Synthetic
forms (dexamethasone, hydrocortisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, and 16-methyl prednisolone) have been
investigated for their potential ability to improve ovarian
response to COS, to reduce the amount of exogenous gonadotropins required, and to optimize the intrauterine environ-

ment to increase the likelihood of implantation after IVF. In
addition, corticosteroids have been hypothesized to improve
the outcome of IVF with conventional insemination in cases
where the male partner has sperm autoantibodies.
The rationale for using corticosteroids to improve ovarian
response to COS is based on several possible mechanisms by
which corticosteroids can affect ovarian function. Dexamethasone may directly mediate proper folliculogenesis, as it acts
as a substrate for the enzyme 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I which is found in luteinized granulosa cells
and oocytes (29, 30). Corticosteroids can suppress elevated
androgen levels, type I which are considered detrimental to
normal folliculogenesis, by acting on the ovaries, adrenals,
and pituitary glands. Furthermore, these agents could
sensitize the ovaries to the actions of exogenous
gonadotropins by increasing production of growth factors
such as insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1. A signiﬁcant rise
in follicular cortisol has been observed prior to ovulation,
suggesting that corticosteroids may play an important role
in oocyte maturation and ovulation (31–33).
Despite differing study designs and inclusion criteria,
several Level-I studies (34–37) have refuted the hypothesis
that the administration of corticosteroids during COS leads
to an improvement in ovarian response or clinical
outcomes. A trial randomized 78 normo-ovulatory women
with tubal factor infertility to receive 0.5 mg or 1 mg of dexamethasone during COS vs. no treatment (34). This trial
demonstrated no improvement in implantation rate (controls
13%, dexamethasone 0.5 mg 11%, and dexamethasone 1 mg
12%) or pregnancy rate (controls 20%, dexamethasone 0.5 mg
16.5%, and dexamethasone 1 mg 20.8%) (34). Another trial
randomized 42 patients with unexplained or anovulatory
infertility and a history of poor response in at least two prior
IVF cycles to 0.5 mg dexamethasone during COS or no treatment, but found no beneﬁt of treatment with low-dose dexamethasone in the studied population of low responders (36). A
third RCT also demonstrated no improvement in implantation
(8.1% treatment vs. 7.8% controls) or pregnancy rate (13.5%
treatment vs. 12.8% controls) (35). A later trial randomized
313 patients under age 39 years to either 10 mg daily oral
prednisolone or no treatment for 4 weeks, starting on the ﬁrst
day of ovarian stimulation (37). There was no difference in
ongoing pregnancy or deliveries between the treatment
groups (prednisolone 39.6% vs. controls 37.1%). The results
of these trials were consistent in demonstrating that treatment
with corticosteroids during COS did not signiﬁcantly affect
the number of developing follicles (36), oocyte yield, fertilization, or clinical pregnancy rate (34, 36, 37). These trials were
limited by their lack of a placebo and failure to provide a
power analysis to demonstrate an adequate sample size to
evaluate the hypothesis that corticosteroids improve ovarian
response to COS. A more recent two-center, double-blinded
RCT randomized 290 patients to 1 mg dexamethasone or placebo and found a reduced rate of cycle cancellation for poor
response in the treatment group (2.8%) vs. controls (12.4%,
P< .002) (29). However, there were no signiﬁcant differences
in fertilization, implantation, or clinical pregnancy rate per
cycle start. Another RCT included 395 ﬁrst-time IVF patients
with normal ovarian reserve who were treated daily with

390
VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
low-dose aspirin (100 mg) combined with prednisone
(10 mg/day from the beginning of ovarian stimulation to
ET, 30 mg/day for 5 days starting from the day of transfer,
and 10 mg/d thereafter, until the day of pregnancy test)
(15). Patients in the treatment group were compared with control patients who did not receive a placebo. The treatment
group had signiﬁcantly improved ovarian response, with
higher estradiol levels on the day of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) trigger (2,082  741 vs. 1,728  672, P< .001)
and signiﬁcantly more oocytes retrieved (14.0  6.5 vs.
10.5  5.1, P< .001) (15). Despite these outcomes, fertilization,
implantation, clinical pregnancy, and early pregnancy loss
rates were similar. A meta-analysis also did not identify a difference in pregnancy rate, clinical pregnancy rate, or implantation rate in women undergoing IVF/ICSI and treated with
prednisolone vs. controls (pregnancy rate: RR 1.02, 95% CI
0.84–1.24; clinical pregnancy rate: RR 1.01, 95% CI
0.82–1.24; implantation rate: RR 1.04, 95% CI 0.85–1.28) (38).
There are two RCTs that contradict these ﬁndings and
report on corticosteroids positively impacting pregnancy
rates in patients undergoing ovarian stimulation (39, 40).
One of these trials randomized 146 hyperandrogenemic,
infertile patients undergoing COS with exogenous
gonadotropins and/or clomiphene citrate to receive 7.5 mg
of oral prednisolone daily from cycle day 1 until pregnancy
or menstrual bleeding or no treatment (39). Treatment
suppressed serum dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S)
and testosterone and led to improved follicular response,
signiﬁed by signiﬁcantly higher estradiol levels on the day
of hCG trigger and clinical pregnancy rate (prednisolone
group 21.9% vs. no prednisolone 8.2%, P¼ .037) (39).
Another RCT included patients (N¼129; n¼64 received
treatment) with endometriosis and/or tubal factor infertility
who received daily prednisolone (10 mg from cycle day 3,
increased to 60 mg from oocyte retrieval to ET) (40).
Corticosteroid treatment signiﬁcantly improved the
pregnancy rate in patients with endometriosis and tubal
factor infertility, whereas treatment did not have a beneﬁt
in the patients with tubal factor alone (40). In the subset of
patients who tested positive for autoantibodies (antinuclear
antibodies [ANA], lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin
antibody and/or rheumatoid factor), those who received
corticosteroids had a signiﬁcantly higher pregnancy rate
(40.9% vs. 14.8%, P< .05) (40). However, the comparison of
these subgroups may have been confounded by differences
in baseline characteristics as randomization was not
performed according to autoantibody status. The results of
these RCTs should be interpreted with caution as they are
limited by a lack of a power analysis, signiﬁcant sources of
heterogeneity in the treatment protocol (such as the number
of embryos transferred), and limited generalizability to
today's IVF treatment paradigm, as they were published
over 20 years ago. The most recent study, a meta-analysis
published in 2017, included four RCTs (involving a total of
416 couples with various infertility diagnoses) which demonstrated that daily corticosteroids (10 mg prednisolone or
0.5 mg dexamethasone during ovarian stimulation up until
oocyte retrieval) did not impact clinical pregnancy or livebirth rate (31).

While several retrospective, observational studies have
reported that corticosteroid treatment may improve IVF success rates, these studies are limited by signiﬁcant methodologic ﬂaws (41–46). (See Supplemental Table 2, listing the
use of corticosteroids and IVF outcomes and study
limitations.)
Peri-implantation corticosteroids. Uterine receptivity is
regulated by locally acting growth factors and cytokines
(47–50) that have important roles in mediating
immunological and non-immunological activity within the
endometrium. Natural killer (NK) cells play an important
role in maintaining maternal-fetal immune tolerance and
regulating trophoblast invasion (38). Aberrant cytokine activity and overactivity of NK cells have been associated with implantation failure and early pregnancy loss (47, 51–53). The
administration of corticosteroids around the time of
implantation has been proposed as a strategy to normalize
NK cell activity and cytokine expression, and suppress
inﬂammatory mediators to improve endometrial receptivity
and the odds of successful implantation (47, 54, 55).
Several RCTs have failed to demonstrate any effect of
peri-implantation corticosteroids on ET outcome (35, 47, 56,
57). An RCT which randomized 99 normo-ovulatory women
with tubal factor infertility to 0.5 mg dexamethasone for
5 days from time of ovulation to ET, reported a lack of
improvement in implantation, clinical pregnancy, or livebirth rates (35). Similarly, there was no difference (P>.05)
in implantation (16% vs. 11%), clinical pregnancy (43.5%
vs. 32.3%), or ongoing pregnancy rate (30.7% vs. 28%) in a
trial of 75 IVF patients randomized to receive either 60 mg
prednisone daily for 4 days from time of oocyte retrieval, or
placebo, respectively (57). Both of these trials lacked power
analyses to demonstrate an adequate sample size to detect a
meaningful effect on clinical outcome. A larger study of
206 patients randomized to receive either methylprednisone
or placebo at the time of oocyte retrieval in fresh transfer cycles or a day prior to embryo thaw in frozen ET cycles, reported no difference in implantation or clinical pregnancy
rate in either group (56). A lack of effect of periimplantation corticosteroid administration on clinical
outcome was reiterated by a recent, large, systematic review
which included 14 RCTs involving 1,879 patients who
received either corticosteroids or no treatment prior to transfer (47) as well as a prospective cohort study (58).
The only studies to report that peri-implantation corticosteroid treatment improved ET outcome involved patients
with serum autoantibodies. Autoimmune thyroid disorders
are characterized by the presence of antithyroid antibodies,
such as antithyroid peroxidase and/or thyroglobulin. Thyroid
autoimmunity has been associated with recurrent pregnancy
loss, preterm birth, and recurrent IVF failure (59). A single
study randomized patients with anti-thyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase antibodies (n¼60; age %38 years) to receive
either 5 mg prednisolone daily from day of oocyte retrieval to
pregnancy test or no treatment (59). The treatment group
had higher clinical pregnancy and live-birth rates compared
with the control group (clinical pregnancy: 46.6% vs.
16.6%, P¼ .03; live birth: 46.6% vs. 20%, P¼ .055) (59).

VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
391
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ASRM PAGES
A retrospective cohort study of 120 women positive for serum
ANA reported that patients who received prednisolone (in a
dose ranging from 15 to 60 mg per day, starting the day after
oocyte retrieval) had signiﬁcantly higher implantation and
clinical pregnancy rates than ANA-positive women who did
not receive corticosteroids (60). However, there was no significant difference in live-birth rate. This study may have been
underpowered to analyze the effect of the intervention on
live-birth rate. The results should be interpreted with caution
as this was a retrospective, nonrandomized study involving a
non-uniform intervention, with the corticosteroid dose being
adjusted according to patient tolerance of side effects (60).
Several other retrospective cohort studies have demonstrated
corticosteroid treatment to have a positive clinical impact in
autoantibody-positive subjects (43–46). However, all these
studies were confounded by the fact that treated subjects
underwent co-administration of corticosteroids with aspirin.
Two small cohort studies suggested that glucocorticoid treatment was associated with improved pregnancy rates in the
setting of assisted hatching (61) and tubal factor infertility
(62). However, both investigations were limited by small sample size, no live-birth outcome, and inappropriate statistical
analyses (considering repeat cycles as independent
observations).
The only Level-I study to assess the efﬁcacy of corticosteroids for autoimmune-mediated male infertility reported that
randomization of men with antisperm antibodies to 20 mg of
prednisolone daily for 2 weeks prior to IVF vs. no treatment
did not reduce the amount of sperm-bound antibody and
did not improve IVF outcome (63). Of note, this study was underpowered and did not account for female factor infertility.

Summary Statements
 There is good evidence to recommend against the routine
use of corticosteroids during stimulation to improve the
outcome of live birth in ART cycles in the general population. (From principally Level-I studies of Good quality).
(Grade A).
 There is good evidence to recommend against the routine
use of corticosteroids during the implantation window to
improve the outcome of live birth in ART cycles in the general population. (From principally Level-I studies of Good
quality). (Grade A).
 Additional studies are needed to determine if there are any
subpopulations where beneﬁt may exist but are not proven.

Granulocyte Colony–stimulating Factor (G-CSF)
and Granulocyte/Macrophage Colony–stimulating
Factor (GM-CSF)
Discovery of granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (GM-CSF) and G-CSF production and receptors in
reproductive tissues and impaired fertility of model animals
with introduced mutations in these cytokines raised hope
that supplementation of embryo cultures could improve IVF
outcomes (64). Several aspects were investigated in this
guideline: 1) improvement of embryo development or

lowering of the aneuploidy rate, 2) improvement in endometrial thickness, and 3) overall IVF/pregnancy outcomes.
The studies evaluated to determine if clinical use of GMCSF/G-CSF improves embryo development/aneuploidy outcomes include three randomized trials (65–67) and three
Level-II studies (two cohort studies (68, 69) and one
systematic review) (70). One Level-I study showed no beneﬁt
to the euploidy rate (34.8% treatment vs. 33.3% controls) of
developing embryos (65). Another large multicenter RCT
(N¼1,332 unselected women 25-39 years undergoing IVF)
demonstrated no improvement in embryo development with
GM-CSF treatment vs. controls (normally developed embryos
OR 0.98 [0.91–1.05]) (67). One investigation used donated
surplus 2-4 cell embryos as a cohort, cultured in media supplemented with 2 ng/ml recombinant human (rh)GM-CSF
and observed to blastocyst stage. GM-CSF improved the yield
of implantation-competent blastocysts in human IVF (37/49
GM-CSF vs. 15/50 control culture, P< .0001) (68). No ETs
were performed, making clinical outcomes unevaluable.
Another cohort study directly investigated clinical outcomes,
but failed to demonstrate improvement in embryo quality,
clinical pregnancy rate, or live-birth rate (69). A single RCT
that used unfertilized oocytes activated by the calcium ionophore A23187 with or without GM-CSF suggested improved
activated embryo development rates and quality (66). However, as calcium ionophores are not used in regular clinical practice and are focused on abnormal fertilization events only, the
generalizability is unclear and not clinically applicable. A
systematic review in agreement with these data found no
improvement in implantation rate and pregnancy rate outcomes (70).
With respect to endometrial thickness, four randomized
trials (71–74), ﬁve cohort studies (75–79), and three Level-II
systematic reviews (80–82) were evaluated for this
guideline. Use of G-CSF administered as an intrauterine
infusion was not associated with increased endometrial
thickness in one Level-I study (72) and show inconsistent association with increased thickness in Level-II studies (75–79).
G-CSF was associated with increased endometrial thickness
in one Level-I study which focused on women with a thin
endometrium (74). These studies are limited by heterogeneous
populations, but suggest that G-CSF might beneﬁt patients
with recurrent implantation failure or those with an unresponsive endometrium more than unselected populations.
The impact of G-CSF or GM-CSF treatment on IVF
outcomes has been evaluated in six randomized trials
(67, 71–73, 83, 84), seven cohort studies (75–79, 85, 86),
and ﬁve Level-II systematic reviews (69, 70, 80–82). Use of
G-CSF is associated with improved implantation rate,
clinical pregnancy rate, or both in three of ﬁve RCTs (71,
83, 84), but live-birth rate was not assessed in any included
RCTs assessing G-CSF. The largest multicenter RCT of GMCSF treatment (N¼1,332 unselected women 25-39 years undergoing IVF) demonstrated improved implantation rate (23%
vs. 18.7%, P¼ .02) and live-birth rate/transfer (28.9% vs.
24.1%, P¼ .03), with sub-analysis suggesting speciﬁc beneﬁt
regarding live birth in women with a history of recurrent
miscarriage (29.6% vs. 23.1%, P¼ .02) (67). However, the
improvement in outcome was only observed in suboptimal

392
VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
culture conditions (low human serum albumin [HSA] concentration) used in the ﬁrst 620 subjects and not in the remaining
529 subjects, where a normal (higher) HSA concentration was
used. In normal culture conditions, there was no improvement
in any pregnancy outcome. Four of seven Level-II/cohort
studies did not show improvement in IVF outcome (75–78),
and neither did two Level-II systematic reviews (70, 80),
while a third Level-II systematic review suggested that a subset of studies with systemic injection demonstrated increased
implantation rate and clinical pregnancy rate (87). Two LevelII meta-analyses showed improvement in implantation rate
and clinical pregnancy rate with G-CSF, but the difference
was more signiﬁcant in subgroups of patients with a thin
endometrium or repeated IVF failure, not for those with
normal endometrial thickness (81, 82). It should be noted
that there is a high level of heterogeneity among studies,
with variations in study foci, doses, treatment types, and
lack of adjustment for meaningful confounders. Taken
together, additional investigations are warranted to further
evaluate the role of G-CSF in selected subgroups, such as
women with recurrent implantation failure and thin
endometrium where potential beneﬁt exists but is not
consistently demonstrated.

Summary Statements
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend for or against
local G-CSF to improve endometrial thickness in women
with thin endometrium or clinical pregnancy rates with
IVF. (From principally Level-I studies of Good quality and
Level-II studies of Low and Good quality with inconsistent
ﬁndings). (Grade C).
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend for or against
G-CSF or GM-CSF administered locally or systemically to
improve IVF outcomes. (From principally Level-I studies
of Good quality and Level-II studies of Low and Good quality with inconsistent ﬁndings). (Grade C).

Intravenous Fat Emulsions
Intravenous fat emulsions used for parental nutrition have
been shown to inhibit pro-inﬂammatory mediators (88). In
an early murine model, the rate of spontaneous abortion
was signiﬁcantly reduced with the administration of intravenous fat emulsions (89), which is thought to reduce the activity of NK cells within the endometrium.
One RCT has evaluated intravenous fat emulsions as an
intervention in 296 women (n¼144 in the treatment group,
n¼152 controls) with unexplained secondary infertility,
recurrent spontaneous abortion, and elevated NK cell activity
(>12%) (90). This study showed that infusion of intravenous
fat emulsions given on the day of oocyte retrieval was associated with a statistically signiﬁcant increase in ongoing
pregnancy rate and live-birth rate (treatment group 37.5%
vs. controls 22.4%, P¼ .005), a nonsigniﬁcant increase in
chemical pregnancy rate, and a nonsigniﬁcant reduction in
spontaneous abortion rate (90). A prospective cohort study
intended as a pilot to investigate the effectiveness of intravenous fat emulsions on outcomes of women aged 40–42 years

undergoing IVF-ET was terminated early because preliminary
data showed no live births in the intravenous fat emulsion
group and a 30% live-birth rate in the untreated controls (91).

Summary Statement
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to routinely recommend
intravenous fat emulsions for infertile women pursuing
IVF. (From one Level-I study of High quality and one
Level-II study of Low quality). (Grade C).
 Additional studies are needed to identify populations where
beneﬁts may exist but are not proven.

Intravenous Immunoglobulin (IVIG)
Anti-inﬂammatory and immune-modulating properties of
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) have been considered
as potential treatment for failed IVF and recurrent pregnancy
loss given the hypothesized role of inﬂammatory bias in these
conditions. Despite interest, only two small randomized trials
(92, 93) have assessed the effect of IVIG administration on IVF
outcomes. Additionally, 10 Level-II studies, 7 of which are
cohort studies (94–100) and 3 are systematic reviews (101–
103), are included in this guideline examine IVIG and IVF.
IVIG was associated with improved implantation rate
(treatment group 8/45 [17.7%] vs. placebo 4/61 [6.5%],
P< .05), but not pregnancy rate (treatment group 6/18
[33.3%] vs. placebo 4/21 [19.1%], not signiﬁcant [NS]) in
one RCT of 39 women with R2 very early abortions
(<8 weeks) or biochemical pregnancies and R3 failed attempts of ET after IVF (93). Another more recent and welldesigned Level-I study of 51 women with repeat unexplained
IVF failure showed no signiﬁcant improvement in live-birth
rate (treatment group 4/26 [15%] vs. controls 3/25 [12%],
P¼ .52); however, there were only seven pregnancies total
(92). Seven Level-II studies, showed improvement with IVIG
in at least some parameters (95–98, 100–103), but with a
very high level of heterogeneity among studies. Six studies
showed improved live-birth rate (96–98, 100–102). Two
cohort studies employed analysis of NK/NKT cell expansion
or T helper (Th)1:Th2 ratio in the peripheral blood for
immune stratiﬁcation of treatment and response (97, 100).
One of these studies was observational, retrospective, and
with an unusually high live-birth rate (recurrent implantation
failure group 80% vs. 17.9%, P¼ .0001; recurrent miscarriage
group 96.3% vs. 30.8%, P¼ .0001) (97), while the other study,
also retrospective, demonstrated an improvement in implantation rate speciﬁcally in patients with elevated Th1:Th2 ratio
(45% IVIG vs. 22% control) (100). Given the expense, unclear
stratiﬁcation criteria, and risk associated with use, use of IVIG
should be considered only in the context of well-designed
prospective trials.

Summary Statements
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend IVIG administration as part of IVF to improve IVF outcomes. (From two
Level-I, but underpowered, studies, one Good quality and
one Low quality). (Grade C).

VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
393
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ASRM PAGES
 Subpopulations that beneﬁt from treatment may exist, but
additional high-quality experimental RCTs are needed to
deﬁne indications and explore risks and beneﬁts.

Adalimumab
Considerable success in the treatment of autoimmune diseases with disease-modifying agents such as adalimumab (tumor necrosis factor alpha [TNFa] blocking antibody,
HumiraÒ) raises hope that patients with abnormally high
TNF secretion may beneﬁt from treatment in conjunction
with IVF. A single collaborative group of investigators has
explored this hypothesis, with interesting, but unreplicated,
results (98, 99, 104, 105). These studies employed a Th1:Th2
ratio assessment by ﬂow cytometry (TNFa:interleukin [IL]10 intracellular ratio after activation by phorbol ester/calcium
ionofore) and an NK cell cytotoxicity assay (K562 cell-line
killing, indirectly) to stratify patients into a high-TNFa group
that was subsequently treated with adalimumab alone or in
combination with IVIG compared with a control group, with
all patients also receiving a low molecular-weight heparin
(LMWH) and low-dose aspirin. One of the reports showed a
statistically signiﬁcant elevation in live-birth rate among patients treated with adalimumab or IVIG compared with controls (50% [3/6] adalimumab vs. 0% [0/5] controls) (98).
This was a small study of 75 subfertile women with Th1/
Th2 cytokine elevation who were assigned to one of four
different arms (assignment was based on laboratory results
and patient acceptance of treatment): Group I, 41 patients
received both IVIG and adalimumab; Group II, 23 patients
received IVIG; Group III, 6 patients received adalimumab;
and Group IV, 5 patients received neither IVIG nor adalimumab (98). A different report from the same group correlated
the degree of correction of purported Th1:Th2 ‘‘abnormality’’
with implantation rate and live-birth rate, and only with
subset selection of patients with ‘‘inadequate cytokine
suppression’’ with those where optimal treatment outcome
was obtained was there a correlation with implantation rate
(104). Finally, their most recent retrospective analysis of
this dataset also examined embryo development cohort quality (that the authors term ‘‘die-off ratio’’) and found that treatment with adalimumab eliminated the correlation between
cohort quality and implantation rate (105).
Although interesting, these studies suffer from multiple
challenges to interpretation. First, they are all retrospective
observational studies, where these agents were used without
any attempt at randomization or prospective standardization. Second, stability and meaning of clinical Th1:Th2 ratio
or NK cytotoxicity assays are poorly deﬁned and not in
routine clinical use even among the immunology/rheumatology community. Third, these studies were not conducted
in accordance with current standards for human protection
(98, 99, 104). Fourth, these investigations had small
sample sizes and extensive heterogeneity in treatments
and multiple medications (adalimumab, IVIG, LMWH,
aspirin, and even dexamethasone). Although the concept
and approach are interesting, it is difﬁcult to ascertain
what conclusions can be drawn from these studies, beyond
the need for both validation of the diagnostic assays used

and a prospective, randomized trial to directly assess the
role for TNF inhibitors in IVF (with or without pretreatment immune stratiﬁcation). Consequently, these therapies should only be used in the context of exploratory,
Institutional Review Board (IRB)-approved studies. These
trials should also consider risk associated with treatment.
While the potential risks associated with short-term use of
adalimumab are unknown, long-term use (greater than
12 weeks) has been associated with an increased risk of
serious infection and malignancy (106).

Summary Statement
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend adalimumab
treatment to improve IVF outcome. (From Level-II studies
of Low quality). (Grade C).

Peripheral Mononuclear Cells
Successful embryo implantation requires a receptive endometrium with an optimal level of local inﬂammation. Aberrant
cell signaling leading to immune dysfunction has been implicated in implantation failure, especially in cases of repeated
failed IVF-ET. One possible mechanism may involve poor
lymphocyte recruitment within the endometrium. Intrauterine infusion of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
has been investigated as a possible therapy for patients with
recurrent implantation failure, based on the rationale that
maternal immune cells are necessary to achieve immune
tolerance to embryonic implantation and placentation. While
the precise mechanism of action is unclear, one RCT investigated the efﬁcacy of PBMCs (107). This trial randomized patients with a history of repeated implantation failure to
receive either autologous PBMCs cultured and instilled into
the endometrial cavity prior to transfer or to standard ET,
without pretreatment (107). The treatment group experienced
a signiﬁcantly increased clinical pregnancy rate (P< .05) and
reduced, but not signiﬁcant, early pregnancy loss rate. However, these ﬁndings are limited by the study's small sample
size and the lack of a power analysis. Furthermore, the study
included only poor-prognosis patients with a history of
repeated IVF failure, contributing to potential selection bias
and limiting the generalizability of the ﬁndings. A second,
nonrandomized Level-II study of poor quality suggested
that treatment with PBMCs improved live-birth rate in
women with more than four failed transfers and in those
with endometrial thickness between 7 and 8 mm (108).

Summary Statement
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend intrauterine
infusion of autologous peripheral mononuclear cells prior
to ET to improve IVF outcome. (From one Level-I study
of Low quality and one Level-II study of Low quality).
(Grade C).

Seminal Plasma
Instillation of seminal plasma into the uterus and/or cervix at
the time of ovum pickup for IVF has been investigated as a

394
VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
strategy to improve pregnancy rates in fresh ET cycles. In
some animal models this step appears essential for ART
(109) and has been theorized to improve endometrial receptivity and/or immune tolerance (110, 111).
Available RCTs investigating the use of seminal plasma
insemination have all shown a statistically nonsigniﬁcant increase in pregnancy rate compared to either placebo or no
intervention (112–115). Of these, two showed an increase in
implantation rate with administration of seminal plasma,
although one increase was statistically signiﬁcant (34.7%
vs. 27.5%, P¼ .026) (112), while the other was not (21.4%
vs. 16.9%, P¼ .71) (113). A meta-analysis of seven RCTs
showed a statistically signiﬁcant improvement in clinical
pregnancy rate but no signiﬁcant improvement in ongoing
pregnancy or live-birth rate with seminal plasma insemination (116).

Summary Statement
 There is fair evidence that seminal plasma insemination as
part of IVF improves clinical pregnancy rate (From Level-I
studies of Good and High quality). (Grade B). However,
there is fair evidence that it does not improve ongoing
pregnancy or live-birth rates. (From underpowered LevelI studies of Good quality). (Grade B).

Spermatozoa, Antibody-free Preparation
Antibody-free preparation of spermatozoa has been investigated as a technique to reduce the potential impact of antisperm
antibodies on fertilization rates in couples with antisperm
antibody-positive male partners. These investigations were primarily conducted to develop techniques to prevent failed fertilization following conventional insemination prior to the
development of ICSI. Antisperm antibodies have been reported
in as many as 10% of infertile couples (117), and may impair
either sperm transport or zona penetration (118). Both of these
mechanisms have been proposed as possible barriers to natural
conception and success with intrauterine insemination (IUI) in
these couples. However, presence of both immunoglobulin G
(IgG) and immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibodies is associated
with lower fertilization rates in IVF (119, 120).
One RCT of 36 patients assessed the beneﬁt of
chymotrypsin-galactose treatment of sperm vs. sperm incubated in culture medium in patients with over 50% antisperm
antibodies, IgG, IgA, or both (121). Chymotrypsin-galactose
treatment was associated with an improvement in fertilization
rate (46.7% vs. 27.3%, P< .05) and a nonsigniﬁcant increase in
pregnancy rate (per patient 32% vs. 18.2%, P¼ .34; per cycle
21.1% vs. 9.5%, P¼ .23), but the percentage of sperm bound
with antibodies was not reduced (121). In another study using
couples as their own controls, an antibody-free preparation of
sperm in a cohort of 18 couples with an antibody-positive
male partner undergoing 24 IVF cycles did not improve fertilization rates compared with untreated sperm (122).

Summary Statements
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to support the recommendation either for or against antibody-free preparation of sper-

matozoa in improving IVF outcomes. (From one Level-I
study of Low quality and one Level-II study of Low quality).
(Grade C). This procedure has been rendered obsolete by the
use of ICSI.

Tacrolimus
The establishment of a healthy pregnancy requires
maternal immune tolerance to the invading trophoblast
to ensure successful implantation and adequate placentation and fetal growth. Th1 and Th2 mediate immune rejection and tolerance, with recurrent implantation failure
being associated with a high peripheral blood Th1/Th2 ratio. A Th1 immune response is associated with allograft, as
well as embryo, rejection (123, 124). Based on this
rationale, a prospective study (125) evaluated the effect
of treating patients with recurrent implantation failure
with tacrolimus—an immunosuppressive drug that inhibits
antigen-induced lymphocytic proliferation, cytotoxic
T-cell formation, IL-2 receptor expression, and the production of IL-2 and interferon-gamma. The study included
patients with a history of at least ﬁve prior failed IVF
cycles and elevated peripheral blood Th1/Th2 ratios and
compared the outcomes of patients who received 1 to
3 mg tacrolimus 2 days prior to ET. When comparing IVF
outcome of treated patients (n¼25) and untreated controls
(n¼17), the treated cohort had signiﬁcantly higher clinical
pregnancy (per ET, treated 64% vs. untreated 0%, P< .0001)
and live-birth rates (treated 60% vs. untreated 0%,
P< .0001) (125). These results should be interpreted with
caution as the study was subject to selection bias due to
lack of randomization and a small sample size.

Summary Statement
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend tacrolimus to
improve IVF-ET outcome. (From a single Level-II study of
Low quality). (Grade C).

HARMS AND BENEFITS
While short-term use of some of the immunotherapies reviewed in this document (e.g., aspirin and corticosteroids)
are unlikely to be associated with long-term harm, for others
there are known risks, and a full accounting of these risks
must be weighed against any potential beneﬁts. For example,
IVIG use has been associated with fever, hypotension, tachycardia, thromboembolic complications, and anaphylactic reactions (126). As a pooled blood product, IVIG use is also
associated with an inherent risk of infectious disease. While
intravenous fat emulsion infusions are generally well tolerated, jaundice and hyperthermia have been reported (127).
Cytokines such as G-CSF are used in healthy donors in the
setting of blood and marrow transplantation. In this setting,
common side effects associated with systemic administration
include bone pain and myalgias (128). Tacrolimus is most
commonly used as an immunosuppressant to prevent whole
organ rejection. In this setting, known side effects include
nephrotoxicity,
neurotoxicity,
hypertention,
and

VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
395
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ASRM PAGES
diabetogenic effects (129). With each of the above agents, risk
and side-effect proﬁles associated with short-term use, such
as in the setting of IVF, are poorly characterized.
Beyond the risks to the patient herself with the use of
immunotherapy, these agents may cause harm in the present
treatment cycle. In a trial of low-dose aspirin vs. untreated
controls, the aspirin group required a higher dose of folliclestimulating hormone prior to oocyte retrieval and had a higher
number of immature oocytes (17). Additionally, the authors
noted that ‘‘the ratio of good quality embryo per retrieved
oocytes was strongly unbalanced between the two groups
with a clear advantage for the untreated group and, for the
treated one, at lower dose of LDA [low-dose aspirin]’’ (17).
Intravenous fat emulsion treatment also may be associated
with harm in the present treatment cycle; authors cancelled
their study investigating the effectiveness of intravenous fat
emulsions on outcomes of women aged 40–42 years undergoing IVF-ET due to no live births in the intravenous fat emulsion group and a 30% live-birth rate in untreated controls
(91). While medications such as aspirin and corticosteroids
are inexpensive, others such as IVIG and adalimumab are
costly, and their use may give false hope to patients who are
struggling with infertility. Most of these therapies should
only be used under IRB-approved protocols.

CONCLUSIONS
Immunotherapies aimed at improving the likelihood of live
birth in IVF treatment have largely proven to be ineffective
or have been insufﬁciently investigated to make deﬁnitive
recommendations for their use. In some cases, the use of these
adjuvants has been associated with improved surrogate outcomes such as clinical pregnancy. However, these studies
tend to involve narrowly deﬁned subgroups of patients identiﬁed through immunological testing, which frequently is not
widely available, reproducible, or recommended. Given the
uncertain beneﬁts and meaningful risks of immunotherapy,
future studies should focus on well-deﬁned subgroups where
potential for beneﬁt exists but is not consistently demonstrated. A careful assessment of risks associated with therapy
must be undertaken in the design of adequately powered RCTs
investigating immunotherapies as adjuvants in ART treatment. These investigations should focus on the outcome of
live birth. If beneﬁt is demonstrated, then the evaluation of
cost-effectiveness is a priority given the high cost of some
immunotherapy treatments.

UNANSWERED QUESTIONS
 Future studies of adjuvant immunotherapy in IVF should
be adequately powered for the primary outcome of live
birth and focus on populations where the potential for
beneﬁt exists, but has not been conclusively demonstrated,
including conditions such as implantation failure and
recurrent miscarriage.
 Side-effect proﬁles for immunotherapies should be carefully documented in subsequent RCTs.
 Subsequent RCTs investigating immunotherapies should
focus on a single agent within a given study. Ideally, these

investigations would be multicenter in order to increase the
generalizability of the trial results. Immunological testing
as part of these trials should be standardized to improve
reproducibility of ﬁndings.
 G-CSF/GM-CSF should be reserved for investigational trials in selected subpopulations.
 Until clear and consistent relationships are demonstrated
between immunophenotypes and ART outcomes, routine
immunological testing in the general ART population
cannot be recommended.

SUMMARY
 Given the lack of evidence to support improved IVF outcomes, there is good evidence to recommend against the
routine use of low-dose aspirin to improve the outcome
of live birth in ART cycles in the general population.
(From Level-I studies of Good and High quality). (Grade A).
 There is good evidence to recommend against the routine
use of corticosteroids during stimulation to improve the
outcome of live birth in ART cycles in the general population. (From principally Level-I studies of Good quality).
(Grade A).
 There is good evidence to recommend against the routine
use of corticosteroids during the implantation window to
improve the outcome of live birth in ART cycles in the general population. (From principally Level-I studies of Good
quality). (Grade A).
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend for or against
local G-CSF to improve endometrial thickness in women
with thin endometrium or clinical pregnancy rates with
IVF. (From principally Level-I studies of Good quality and
Level-II studies of Low and Good quality with inconsistent
ﬁndings). (Grade C).
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend for or against
G-CSF or GM-CSF administered locally or systemically to
improve IVF outcomes. (From principally Level-I studies
of Good quality and Level-II studies of Low and Good quality with inconsistent ﬁndings). (Grade C).
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to routinely recommend
intravenous fat emulsions for infertile women pursuing
IVF. (From one Level-I study of High quality and one
Level-II study of Low quality). (Grade C).
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend IVIG administration as part of IVF to improve IVF outcomes. (From two
Level-I, but underpowered, studies, one Good quality and
one Low quality). (Grade C).
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend adalimumab
treatment to improve IVF outcome. (From Level-II studies
of Low quality). (Grade C).
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend intrauterine
infusion of autologous peripheral mononuclear cells prior
to ET to improve IVF outcome. (From one Level-I study
of Low quality and one Level-II study of Low quality).
(Grade C).
 There is fair evidence that seminal plasma insemination as
part of IVF improves clinical pregnancy rate (From Level-I
studies of Good and High quality). (Grade B). However,

396
VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
there is fair evidence that it does not improve ongoing
pregnancy or live-birth rates. (From underpowered LevelI studies of Good quality). (Grade B).
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to support the recommendation either for or against antibody-free preparation of spermatozoa in improving IVF outcomes. (From one Level-I
study of Low quality and one Level-II study of Low quality).
(Grade C). This procedure has been rendered obsolete by the
use of ICSI.
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend tacrolimus to
improve IVF-ET outcome. (From a single Level-II study of
Low quality). (Grade C).

Jay Sandlow, M.D.; Peter Schlegel, M.D.; Dale Stovall, M.D.,
Michael Vernon, Ph.D.

REFERENCES
1.

2.
3.

4.

RECOMMENDATIONS
 Immunotherapies reviewed in the present document are
either not associated with improved live-birth outcome in
IVF or have been insufﬁciently studied to make deﬁnitive
conclusions regarding beneﬁts and risks. In the absence
of well-designed adequately powered RCTs, patients must
be informed of uncertain beneﬁts and risks associated
with immunotherapy.
 There is no evidence to suggest screening for these conditions in an asymptomatic population.
Acknowledgments: This report was developed under the
direction of the Practice Committee of the American Society
for Reproductive Medicine as a service to its members and
other practicing clinicians. Although this document reﬂects
appropriate management of a problem encountered in the
practice of reproductive medicine, it is not intended to be
the only approved standard of practice or to dictate an exclusive course of treatment. Other plans of management may be
appropriate, taking into account the needs of the individual
patient, available resources, and institutional or clinical practice limitations. The Practice Committee and the Board of Directors of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine
have approved this report.
This document was reviewed by ASRM members and their
input was considered in the preparation of the ﬁnal document. The Practice Committee acknowledges the special
contribution of Karl Hansen, MD, PhD, Aleksandar StanicKostic, MD, PhD, Lucky Sekhon, MD, Heather Burks, MD, Alison Zimon, MD, and Carla Stec, MA, in the preparation of this
document. The following members of the ASRM Practice
Committee participated in the development of this document.
All Committee members disclosed commercial and ﬁnancial
relationships with manufacturers or distributors of goods or
services used to treat patients. Members of the Committee
who were found to have conﬂicts of interest based on the relationships disclosed did not participate in the discussion or
development of this document.
Alan Penzias, M.D.; Kristin Bendikson, M.D.; Samantha
Butts, M.D., M.S.C.E.; Christos Coutifaris, M.D., Ph.D.; Tommaso Falcone, M.D.; Susan Gitlin, Ph.D.; Clarisa Gracia,
M.D., M.S.C.E.; Karl Hansen, M.D., Ph.D.; Sangita Jindal,
Ph.D.; Jennifer Mersereau, M.D.; Randall Odem, M.D.; Robert
Rebar, M.D.; Richard Reindollar, M.D.; Mitchell Rosen, M.D.;

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

West SG, Duan N, Pequegnat W, Gaist P, Des Jarlais DC, Holtgrave D, et al.
Alternatives to the Randomized Controlled Trial. Am J Public Health 2008;
98:1359–66 (Background).
Hill JA, Scott RT. Immunologic Tests Ivf: ‘‘please, Enough already.’’ Fertil
Steril 2000;74:439–42 (Background).
Ghazeeri GS, Kutteh WH. Immunological testing and treatment in reproduction: frequency assessment of practice patterns at assisted reproduction clinics in the USA and Australia. Hum Reprod 2001;16:2130–5
(Background).
Haapsamo M, Martikainen H, Rasanen J. Low-dose aspirin and uterine haemodynamics on the day of embryo transfer in women undergoing IVF/ICSI:
a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study. Hum Reprod 2009;
24:861–6 (Background).
Steer CV, Campbell S, Tan SL, Crayford T, Mills C, Mason BA, et al. The use
of transvaginal color ﬂow imaging after in vitro fertilization to identify optimum uterine conditions before embryo transfer. Fertil Steril 1992;57:
372–6 (Background).
Duvan CI, Ozmen B, Satiroglu H, Atabekoglu CS, Berker B. Does addition of
low-dose aspirin and/or steroid as a standard treatment in nonselected intracytoplasmic sperm injection cycles improve in vitro fertilization success?
A randomized, prospective, placebo-controlled study. J Assist Reprod
Genet 2006;23:15–21 (Level I).
Lambers MJ, Hoozemans DA, Schats R, Homburg R, Lambalk CB,
Hompes PG. Low-dose aspirin in non-tubal IVF patients with previous failed
conception: a prospective randomized double-blind placebo-controlled
trial. Fertil Steril 2009;92:923–9 (Level I).
Moini A, Zafarani F, Haddadian S, Ahmadi J, Honar H, Riazi K. Effect of lowdose aspirin therapy on implantation rate in women undergoing in-vitro
fertilization cycles. Saudi Med J 2007;28:732–6 (Level I).
Urman B, Mercan R, Alatas C, Balaban B, Isiklar A, Nuhoglu A. Low-dose
aspirin does not increase implantation rates in patients undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection: a prospective randomized study. J Assist Reprod
Genet 2000;17:586–90 (Level I).
Rubinstein M, Marazzi A, Polak de Fried E. Low-dose aspirin treatment improves ovarian responsiveness, uterine and ovarian blood ﬂow velocity, implantation, and pregnancy rates in patients undergoing in vitro fertilization:
a prospective, randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled assay. Fertil
Steril 1999;71:825–9 (Level I).
Frattarelli JL, McWilliams GD, Hill MJ, Miller KA, Scott RT Jr. Low-dose
aspirin use does not improve in vitro fertilization outcomes in poor responders. Fertil Steril 2008;89:1113–7 (Level II).
Check JH, Dietterich C, Lurie D, Nazari A, Chuong J. A matched study to
determine whether low-dose aspirin without heparin improves pregnancy rates following frozen embryo transfer and/or affects endometrial sonographic parameters. J Assist Reprod Genet 1998;15:579–82
(Level I).
Dirckx K, Cabri P, Merien A, Galajdova L, Gerris J, Dhont M, et al. Does lowdose aspirin improve pregnancy rate in IVF/ICSI? A randomized doubleblind placebo controlled trial. Hum Reprod 2009;24:856–60 (Level I).
P€akkil€a M, R€as€anen J, Heinonen S, Tinkanen H, Tuomivaara L, M€akikallio K,
et al. Low-dose aspirin does not improve ovarian responsiveness or pregnancy rate in IVF and ICSI patients: a randomized, placebo-controlled double-blind study. Hum Reprod 2005;20:2211–4 (Level I).
Revelli A, Dolﬁn E, Gennarelli G, Lantieri T, Massobrio M, Holte JG, et al.
Low-dose acetylsalicylic acid plus prednisolone as an adjuvant treatment
in IVF: a prospective, randomized study. Fertil Steril 2008;90:1685–91
(Level I).
Weckstein LN, Jacobson A, Galen D, Hampton K, Hammel J. Low-dose
aspirin for oocyte donation recipients with a thin endometrium: prospective, randomized study. Fertil Steril 1997;68:927–30 (Level I).
Gizzo S, Capuzzo D, Zicchina C, Di Gangi S, Coronella ML, Andrisani A,
et al. Could empirical low-dose-aspirin administration during IVF cycle

VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
397
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ASRM PAGES

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

affect both the oocytes and embryos quality via COX 1-2 activity inhibition?
J Assist Reprod Genet 2014;31:261–8 (Level II).
Hurst BS, Bhojwani JT, Marshburn PB, Papadakis MA, Loeb TA,
Matthews ML. Low-dose aspirin does not improve ovarian stimulation,
endometrial response, or pregnancy rates for in vitro fertilization. J Exp
Clin Assist Reprod 2005;2:8 (Level II).
Frattarelli JL, Miller BT, Scott RT Jr. Adjuvant therapy enhances endometrial
receptivity in patients undergoing assisted reproduction. Reprod Biomed
Online 2006;12:722–9 (Level II).
€m U, Hellberg D, Nilsson S. Low-dose aspirin in a short regimen
Waldenstro
as standard treatment in in vitro fertilization: a randomized, prospective
study. Fertil Steril 2004;81:1560–4 (Level II).
Haapsamo M, Martikainen H, Tinkanen H, Heinonen S, Nuojua-Huttunen S,
R€
as€
anen J. Low-dose aspirin therapy and hypertensive pregnancy complications in unselected IVF and ICSI patients: a randomized, placebo-controlled,
double-blind study. Hum Reprod 2010;25:2972–7 (Level I).
Shirlow R, Healey M, Volovsky M, MacLachlan V, Vollenhoven B. The effects of adjuvant therapies on embryo transfer success. J Reprod Infertil
2017;18:368–78 (Level II).
Gelbaya TA, Kyrgiou M, Li TC, Stern C, Nardo LG. Low-dose aspirin for
in vitro fertilization: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod
Update 2007;13:357–64 (Level I).
Khairy M, Banerjee K, El-Toukhy T, Coomarasamy A, Khalaf Y. Aspirin in
women undergoing in vitro fertilization treatment: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 2007;88:822–31 (Level I).
Ruopp MD, Collins TC, Whitcomb BW, Schisterman EF. Evidence of
absence or absence of evidence? A reanalysis of the effects of low-dose
aspirin in in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 2008;90:71–6 (Level I).
Groeneveld E, Broeze KA, Lambers MJ, Haapsamo M, Dirckx K, Schoot BC,
et al, IPD MARIA study group. Is aspirin effective in women undergoing
in vitro fertilization (IVF)? Results from an individual patient data metaanalysis (IPD MA). Hum Reprod Update 2011;17:501–9 (Level I).
Dentali F, Ageno W, Rezoagli E, Rancan E, Squizzato A, Middeldorp S, et al.
Low-dose aspirin for in vitro fertilization or intracytoplasmic sperm injection: a systematic review and a meta-analysis of the literature. J Thromb
Haemost 2012;10:2075–85 (Level I).
Siristatidis CS, Basios G, Pergialiotis V, Vogiatzi P. Aspirin for in vitro fertilisation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;11:CD004832 (Level I).
Keay SD, Lenton EA, Cooke ID, Hull MG, Jenkins JM. Low-dose dexamethasone augments the ovarian response to exogenous gonadotrophins leading to a reduction in cycle cancellation rate in a standard IVF programme.
Hum Reprod 2001;16:1861–5 (Level I).
Best R, Nelson SM, Walker BR. Dexamethasone and 11-dehydrodexamethasone as tools to investigate the isozymes of 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in vitro and in vivo. J Endocrinol 1997;153:41–8
(Background).
Kalampokas T, Pandian Z, Keay SD, Bhattacharya S. Glucocorticoid supplementation during ovarian stimulation for IVF or ICSI. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2017;3:CD004752 (Level I).
Andersen CY, Hornnes P. Intrafollicular concentrations of free cortisol close
to follicular rupture. Hum Reprod 1994;9:1944–9 (Background).
Harlow CR, Jenkins JM, Winston RM. Increased follicular ﬂuid total and free
cortisol levels during the luteinizing hormone surge. Fertil Steril 1997;68:
48–53 (Background).
Bider D, Amoday I, Tur-Kaspa I, Livshits A, Dor J. The addition of a glucocorticoid to the protocol of programmed oocyte retrieval for in-vitro
fertilization–a randomized study. Hum Reprod 1996;11:1606–8 (Level I).
Bider D, Amoday I, Yonesh M, Yemini Z, Mashiach S, Dor J. Glucocorticoid
administration during transfer of frozen-thawed embryos: a prospective,
randomized study. Fertil Steril 1996;66:154–6 (Level I).
Bider D, Blankstein J, Levron J, Tur-Kaspa I. Gonadotropins and glucocorticoid therapy for ‘‘low responders’’–a controlled study. J Assist Reprod
Genet 1997;14:328–31 (Level I).
Ubaldi F, Rienzi L, Ferrero S, Anniballo R, Iacobelli M, Cobellis L, et al. Low
dose prednisolone administration in routine ICSI patients does not improve
pregnancy and implantation rates. Hum Reprod 2002;17:1544–7 (Level I).

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.
49.
50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

Dan S, Wei W, Yichao S, Hongbo C, Shenmin Y, Jiaxiong W, et al. Effect of
prednisolone administration on patients with unexplained recurrent
miscarriage and in routine intracytoplasmic sperm injection: a meta-analysis. Am J Reprod Immunol 2015;74:89–97 (Level I).
Kemeter P, Feichtinger W. Prednisolone supplementation to Clomid and/or
gonadotrophin stimulation for in-vitro fertilization–a prospective randomized trial. Hum Reprod 1986;1:441–4 (Level I).
Kim CH, Chae HD, Kang BM, Chang YS, Mok JE. The immunotherapy
during in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer cycles in infertile patients with endometriosis. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 1997;23:463–70
(Level I).
Ando T, Suganuma N, Furuhashi M, Asada Y, Kondo I, Tomoda Y. Successful glucocorticoid treatment for patients with abnormal autoimmunity on
in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer. J Assist Reprod Genet 1996;13:
776–81 (Level II).
Forges T, Monnier-Barbarino P, Guillet-May F, Faure GC, Bene MC. Corticosteroids in patients with antiovarian antibodies undergoing in vitro fertilization: a prospective pilot study. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2006;62:699–705
(Level II).
Geva E, Amit A, Lerner-Geva L, Yaron Y, Daniel Y, Schwartz T, et al. Prednisone and aspirin improve pregnancy rate in patients with reproductive
failure and autoimmune antibodies: a prospective study. Am J Reprod Immunol 2000;43:36–40 (Level II).
Hasegawa I, Yamanoto Y, Suzuki M, Murakawa H, Kurabayashi T,
Takakuwa K, et al. Prednisolone plus low-dose aspirin improves the implantation rate in women with autoimmune conditions who are undergoing in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 1998;70:1044–8 (Level II).
Ying Y, Zhong YP, Zhou CQ, Xu YW, Wang Q, Li J, et al. A retrospective
study on IVF outcome in patients with anticardiolipin antibody: effects of
methylprednisolone plus low-dose aspirin adjuvant treatment. J Reprod Immunol 2012;94:196–201 (Level II).
Zhu Q, Wu L, Xu B, Hu MH, Tong XH, Ji JJ, et al. A retrospective study on
IVF/ICSI outcome in patients with anti-nuclear antibodies: the effects of
prednisone plus low-dose aspirin adjuvant treatment. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2013;11:98 (Level II).
Boomsma CM, Keay SD, Macklon NS. Peri-implantation glucocorticoid
administration for assisted reproductive technology cycles. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012:Cd005996 (Level I).
Chard T. Cytokines in implantation. Hum Reprod 1995;1:385–96
(Background).
Dey SK, Lim H, Das SK, Reese J, Paria BC, Daikoku T, et al. Molecular cues to
implantation. Endocr Rev 2004;25:341–73 (Background).
Giudice LC. Growth factors and growth modulators in human uterine
endometrium: their potential relevance to reproductive medicine. Fertil
Steril 1994;61:1–17 (Background).
Ledee N, Dubanchet S, Coulomb-L'hermine A, Durand- Gasselin I,
Frydman R, Chaouat G. A new role for natural killer cells, interleukin (IL)12, and IL-18 in repeated implantation failure after in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 2004;81:59–65 (Background).
Ledee-Bataille N, Bonnet-Chea K, Hosny G, Dubanchet S, Frydman R,
Chaouat G. Role of the endometrial tripod interleukin-18, -15, and -12
in inadequate uterine receptivity in patients with a history of repeated
in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer failure. Fertil Steril 2005;83:598–605
(Background).
Quenby S, Kalumbi C, Bates M, Farquharson R, Vince G. Prednisolone reduces preconceptual endometrial natural killer cells in women with recurrent miscarriage. Fertil Steril 2005;84:980–4 (Background).
Hill JA. Immunological mechanisms of pregnancy maintenance and failure:
a critique of theories and therapy. Am J Reprod Immunol 1990;22:33–41
(Background).
Pountain GD, Keogan MT, Hazleman BL, Brown DL. Effects of single dose
compared with three days' prednisolone treatment of healthy volunteers:
contrasting effects on circulating lymphocyte subsets. J Clin Pathol 1993;
46:1089–92 (Background).
Mofﬁtt D, Queenan JT Jr, Veeck LL, Schoolcraft W, Miller CE, Muasher SJ.
Low-dose glucocorticoids after in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer

398
VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.
65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

have no signiﬁcant effect on pregnancy rate. Fertil Steril 1995;63:571–7
(Level I).
Mottla GL, Smotrich DB, Gindoff PR, Stillman RJ. Increasing clinical pregnancy rates after IVF/ET. Can immunosuppression help? J Reprod Med
1996;41:889–91 (Level I).
Lee KA, Koo JJ, Yoon TK, Do BR, Ko JJ, Cha KY. Immunosuppression by
corticosteroid has no effect on the pregnancy rate in routine in-vitro fertilization/embryo transfer patients. Hum Reprod 1994;9:1832–5 (Level II).
Litwicka K, Arrivi C, Varricchio MT, Mencacci C, Greco E. In women with
thyroid autoimmunity, does low-dose prednisolone administration,
compared with no adjuvant therapy, improve in vitro fertilization clinical results? J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2015;41:722–8 (Level I).
Taniguchi F. Results of prednisolone given to improve the outcome of
in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer in women with antinuclear antibodies.
J Reprod Med 2005;50:383–8 (Level II).
Cohen J, Malter H, Elsner C, Kort H, Massey J, Mayer MP. Immunosuppression supports implantation of zona pellucida dissected human embryos.
Fertil Steril 1990;53:662–5 (Level II).
Polak de Fried E, Blanco L, Lancuba S, Asch RH. Improvement of clinical
pregnancy rate and implantation rate of in-vitro fertilization-embryo
transfer patients by using methylprednisone. Hum Reprod 1993;8:393–
5 (Level II).
Lahteenmaki A, Rasanen M, Hovatta O. Low-dose prednisolone does not
improve the outcome of in-vitro fertilization in male immunological infertility. Hum Reprod 1995;10:3124–9 (Level I).
Robertson SA. GM-CSF regulation of embryo development and pregnancy.
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2007;18:287–98 (Background).
Agerholm I, Loft A, Hald F, Lemmen JG, Munding B, Sorensen PD, et al.
Culture of human oocytes with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor has no effect on embryonic chromosomal constitution. Reprod Biomed Online 2010;20:477–84 (Level I).
Economou KA, Christopikou D, Tsorva E, Davies S, Mastrominas M,
Cazlaris H, et al. The combination of calcium ionophore A23187 and
GM-CSF can safely salvage aged human unfertilized oocytes after ICSI. J
Assist Reprod Genet 2017;34:33–41 (Level I).
Ziebe S, Loft A, Povlsen BB, Erb K, Agerholm I, Aasted M, et al. A randomized clinical trial to evaluate the effect of granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor (GM-CSF) in embryo culture medium for in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 2013;99:1600–9 (Level I).
Sjoblom C, Wikland M, Robertson SA. Granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor promotes human blastocyst development in vitro.
Hum Reprod 1999;14:3069–76 (Level II).
Zhou W, Chu D, Sha W, Fu L, Li Y. Effects of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor supplementation in culture medium on embryo
quality and pregnancy outcome of women aged over 35 years. J Assist Reprod Genet 2016;33:39–47 (Level II).
Siristatidis C, Vogiatzi P, Salamalekis G, Creatsa M, Vrachnis N,
Glujovsky D, et al. Granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor supplementation in culture media for subfertile women undergoing assisted
reproduction technologies: a systematic review. Int J Endocrinol 2013;
2013:704967 (Level II).
Aleyasin A, Abediasl Z, Nazari A, Sheikh M. Granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor in repeated IVF failure, a randomized trial. Reproduction 2016;151:
637–42 (Level I).
Barad DH, Yu Y, Kushnir VA, Shohat-Tal A, Lazzaroni E, Lee HJ, et al. A
randomized clinical trial of endometrial perfusion with granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor in in vitro fertilization cycles: impact on endometrial thickness and clinical pregnancy rates. Fertil Steril 2014;101:
710–5 (Level I).
Eftekhar M, Hosseinisadat R, Baradaran R, Naghshineh E. Effect of granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) on IVF outcomes in infertile
women: An RCT. Int J Reprod Biomed (yazd) 2016;14:341–6 (Level I).
Sarvi F, Arabahmadi M, Alleyassin A, Aghahosseini M, Ghasemi M. Effect
of increased endometrial thickness and implantation rate by granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor on unresponsive thin endometrium in fresh
in vitro fertilization cycles: a randomized clinical trial. Obstet Gynecol Int
2017;2017:3596079 (Level I).

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.
90.

91.

92.

93.

Eftekhar M, Sayadi M, Arabjahvani F. Transvaginal perfusion of G-CSF for
infertile women with thin endometrium in frozen ET program: A nonrandomized clinical trial. Iran J Reprod Med 2014;12:661–6 (Level II).
Kunicki M, Lukaszuk K, Liss J, Skowronska P, Szczyptanska J. Granulocyte
colony stimulating factor treatment of resistant thin endometrium in
women with frozen-thawed blastocyst transfer. Syst Biol Reprod Med
2017;63:49–57 (Level II).
Li Y, Pan P, Chen X, Li L, Li Y, Yang D. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor administration for infertile women with thin endometrium in frozen
embryo transfer program. Reprod Sci 2014;21:381–5 (Level II).
Tehraninejad E, Davari Tanha F, Asadi E, Kamali K, Aziminikoo E, Rezayof E.
G-CSF intrauterine for thin endometrium, and pregnancy outcome. J Fam
Reprod Health 2015;9:107–12 (Level II).
Xu B, Zhang Q, Hao J, Xu D, Li Y. Two protocols to treat thin endometrium
with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor during frozen embryo transfer
cycles. Reprod Biomed Online 2015;30:349–58 (Level II).
Cavalcante MB, Costa Fda S, Barini R, Araujo Junior E. Granulocyte colonystimulating factor and reproductive medicine: A review. Iran J Reprod Med
2015;13:195–202 (Level II).
Xie Y, Zhang T, Tian Z, Zhang J, Wang W, Zhang H, et al. Efﬁcacy of intrauterine perfusion of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) for
Infertile women with thin endometrium: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Reprod Immunol 2017;78 (Level II).
Li J, Mo S, Chen Y. The effect of G-CSF on infertile women undergoing
IVF treatment: A meta-analysis. Syst Biol Reprod Med 2017;63:239–47
(Level II).
Davari-tanha F, Tehraninejad ES, Ghazi M, Shahraki Z. The role of G-CSF in
recurrent implantation failure: A randomized double blind placebo control
trial. Int J Reprod Biomed 2016;14:737–42 (Level I).
Eftekhar M, Miraj S, Farid Mojtahedi M, Neghab N. Efﬁcacy of Intrauterine
infusion of granulocyte colony stimulating factor on patients with history of
implantation failure: A randomized control trial. Int J Reprod Biomed (yazd)
2016;14:687–90 (Level I).
Santjohanser C, Knieper C, Franz C, Hirv K, Meri O, Schleyer M, et al. Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor as treatment option in patients with
recurrent miscarriage. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (warsz) 2013;61:159–64
(Level II).
Tevkin S, Lokshin V, Shishimorova M, Polumiskov V. The frequency of clinical pregnancy and implantation rate after cultivation of embryos in a medium with granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in
patients with preceding failed attempts of ART. Gynecol Endocrinol 2014;
30 Suppl 1:9–12 (Level II).
Zhao J, Xu B, Xie S, Zhang Q, Li YP. Whether G-CSF administration has
beneﬁcial effect on the outcome after assisted reproductive technology?
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2016;14:
62 (Level II).
€ssle C, Le Boucher J, Malno€e A, Dutot G. Effects of
Granato D, Blum S, Ro
parenteral lipid emulsions with different fatty acid composition on immune
cell functions in vitro. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2000;24:113–8
(Background).
Clark DA. Intralipid as treatment for recurrent unexplained abortion? Am J
Reprod Immunol 1994;32:290–3 (Background).
Dakhly DM, Bayoumi YA, Sharkawy M, Gad Allah SH, Hassan MA,
Gouda HM, et al. Intralipid supplementation in women with recurrent
spontaneous abortion and elevated levels of natural killer cells. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2016;135:324–7 (Level I).
Check JH, Check DL. Intravenous intralipid therapy is not beneﬁcial in having a live delivery in women aged 40-42 years with a previous history of
miscarriage or failure to conceive despite embryo transfer undergoing
in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol 2016;43:
14–5 (Level II).
Stephenson MD, Fluker MR. Treatment of repeated unexplained in vitro
fertilization failure with intravenous immunoglobulin: a randomized,
placebo-controlled Canadian trial. Fertil Steril 2000;74:1108–13 (Level I).
De Placido G, Zullo F, Mollo A, Cappiello F, Nazzaro A, Colacurci N, et al.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in the prevention of implantation failures. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1994;734:232–4 (Level I).

VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
399
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ASRM PAGES
94.

95.
96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

Chernyshov VP, Dons'koi BV, Sudoma IO, Goncharova YO. Multiple immune deviations predictive for IVF failure as possible markers for IVIG therapy. Immunol Lett 2016;176:44–50 (Level II).
Coulam CB, Krysa LW, Bustillo M. Intravenous immunoglobulin for in-vitro
fertilization failure. Hum Reprod 1994;9:2265–9 (Level II).
Moraru M, Carbone J, Alecsandru D, Castillo-Rama M, Garcia-Segovia A,
Gil J, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment increased live birth rate
in a Spanish cohort of women with recurrent reproductive failure and
expanded CD56(þ) cells. Am J Reprod Immunol 2012;68:75–84 (Level II).
Ramos-Medina R, Garcia-Segovia A, Gil J, Carbone J, Aguaron de la
Cruz A, Seyfferth A, et al. Experience in IVIg therapy for selected women
with recurrent reproductive failure and NK cell expansion. Am J Reprod Immunol 2014;71:458–66 (Level II).
Winger EE, Reed JL, Ashoush S, Ahuja S, El-Toukhy T, Taranissi M. Treatment with adalimumab (Humira) and intravenous immunoglobulin improves pregnancy rates in women undergoing IVF. Am J Reprod
Immunol 2009;61:113–20 (Level II).
Winger EE, Reed JL, Ashoush S, El-Toukhy T, Ahuja S, Taranissi M. Birth
defect rates in women using Adalimumab (Humira((R)) ) to treat
immunologic-based infertility in IVF patients. Am J Reprod Immunol
2011;66:237–41 (Level II).
Winger EE, Reed JL, Ashoush S, El-Toukhy T, Ahuja S, Taranissi M. Elevated
preconception CD56þ 16þ and/or Th1:Th2 levels predict beneﬁt from
IVIG therapy in subfertile women undergoing IVF. Am J Reprod Immunol
2011;66:394–403 (Level II).
Li J, Chen Y, Liu C, Hu Y, Li L. Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment for
repeated IVF/ICSI failure and unexplained infertility: a systematic review
and a meta-analysis. Am J Reprod Immunol 2013;70:434–47 (Level II).
Clark DA, Coulam CB, Stricker RB. Is intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG)
efﬁcacious in early pregnancy failure? A critical review and meta-analysis
for patients who fail in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer (IVF). J Assist
Reprod Genet 2006;23:1–13 (Level II).
Polanski LT, Barbosa MA, Martins WP, Baumgarten MN, Campbell B,
Brosens J, et al. Interventions to improve reproductive outcomes in women
with elevated natural killer cells undergoing assisted reproduction techniques:
a systematic review of literature. Hum Reprod 2014;29:65–75 (Level II).
Winger EE, Reed JL, Ashoush S, El-Toukhy T, Ahuja S, Taranissi M. Degree
of TNF-alpha/IL-10 cytokine elevation correlates with IVF success rates in
women undergoing treatment with Adalimumab (Humira) and IVIG. Am
J Reprod Immunol 2011;65:610–8 (Level II).
Winger EE, Reed JL, Ashoush S, El-Toukhy T, Taranissi M. Die-off ratio correlates with increased TNF-a:IL-10 ratio and decreased IVF success rates
correctable with humira. Am J Reprod Immunol 2012;68:428–37 (Level II).
Bongartz T, Sutton AJ, Sweeting MJ, Buchan I, Matteson EL, Montori V.
Anti-TNF antibody therapy in rheumatoid arthritis and the risk of serious infections and malignancies: systematic review and Meta-analysis of rare
harmful effects in randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2006;295:2275–
85 (Background).
Madkour A, Bouamoud N, Louanjli N, Kaarouch I, Copin H, Benkhalifa M,
et al. Intrauterine insemination of cultured peripheral blood mononuclear
cells prior to embryo transfer improves clinical outcome for patients with
repeated implantation failures. Zygote 2016;24:58–69 (Level II).
Li S, Wang J, Cheng Y, Zhou D, Yin T, Xu W, et al. Intrauterine administration of hCG-activated autologous human peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) promotes live birth rates in frozen/thawed embryo transfer cycles of patients with repeated implantation failure. J Reprod Immunol
2017;119:15–22.
Flowers WL, Esbenshade KL. Optimizing management of natural and artiﬁcial matings in swine. J Reprod Fertil Suppl 1993;48:217–28
(Background).
Robertson SA, Guerin LR, Moldenhauer LM, Hayball JD. Activating T regulatory cells for tolerance in early pregnancy - the contribution of seminal
ﬂuid. J Reprod Immunol 2009;83:109–16 (Background).
Sharkey DJ, Macpherson AM, Tremellen KP, Robertson SA. Seminal plasma
differentially regulates inﬂammatory cytokine gene expression in human
cervical and vaginal epithelial cells. Mol Hum Reprod 2007;13:491–501
(Background).

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.
127.

128.

129.

Chicea R, Ispasoiu F, Focsa M. Seminal plasma insemination during
ovum-pickup–a method to increase pregnancy rate in IVF/ICSI procedure. A pilot randomized trial. J Assist Reprod Genet 2013;30:569–74
(Level I).
Friedler S, Ben-Ami I, Gidoni Y, Strassburger D, Kasterstein E, Maslansky B,
et al. Effect of seminal plasma application to the vaginal vault in in vitro
fertilization or intracytoplasmic sperm injection treatment cycles-a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study. J Assist Reprod Genet
2013;30:907–11 (Level I).
€sner S, Germeyer A, Jauckus J, Griesinger G, Strowitzki T.
von Wolff M, Ro
Intrauterine instillation of diluted seminal plasma at oocyte pick-up does
not increase the IVF pregnancy rate: a double-blind, placebo controlled,
randomized study. Hum Reprod 2013;28:3247–52 (Level I).
€sner S, Tho
€ne C, Pinheiro RM, Jauckus J, Bruckner T, et al.
von Wolff M, Ro
Intravaginal and intracervical application of seminal plasma in in vitro fertilization or intracytoplasmic sperm injection treatment cycles–a doubleblind, placebo-controlled, randomized pilot study. Fertil Steril 2009;91:
167–72 (Level I).
Crawford G, Ray A, Gudi A, Shah A, Homburg R. The role of seminal
plasma for improved outcomes during in vitro fertilization treatment: review of the literature and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Update 2015;21:
275–84 (Level I).
Ayvaliotis B, Bronson R, Rosenfeld D, Cooper G. Conception rates in couples where autoimmunity to sperm is detected. Fertil Steril 1985;43:739–
42 (Background).
Bronson RA, Cooper GW, Rosenfeld DL. Sperm-speciﬁc isoantibodies and
autoantibodies inhibit the binding of human sperm to the human zona pellucida. Fertil Steril 1982;38:724 (Background).
Junk SM, Matson PL, Yovich JM, Bootsma B, Yovich JL. The fertilization of
human oocytes by spermatozoa from men with antispermatozoal antibodies in semen. J In Vitro Fert Embryo Transf 1986;3:350–2 (Background).
de Almeida M, Gazagne I, Jeulin C, Herry M, Belaisch-Allart J, Frydman R,
et al. In-vitro processing of sperm with autoantibodies and in-vitro fertilization results. Hum Reprod 1989;4:49–53 (Background).
Katsoff D, Check JH, Bollendorf A, Benfer K. Chymotrypsin-galactose treatment of sperm with antisperm antibodies results in improved pregnancy rates
following in vitro fertilization. Am J Reprod Immunol 1995;33:149–54 (Level I).
Grundy CE, Killick SR, Hay DM, Lesny P, Maguiness SD, Robinson J. A prospective clinical trial investigating the efﬁcacy of a method of preparing
subpopulations of antibody-free spermatozoa from the ejaculates of
antibody-positive patients. Int J Androl 1998;21:261–70 (Level II).
Kwak-Kim JY, Chung-Bang HS, Ng SC, Ntrivalas EI, Mangubat CP,
Beaman KD, et al. Increased T helper 1 cytokine responses by circulating
T cells are present in women with recurrent pregnancy losses and in infertile women with multiple implantation failures after IVF. Hum Reprod
2003;18:767–73 (Background).
Ng SC, Gilman-Sachs A, Thaker P, Beaman KD, Beer AE, Kwak-Kim J.
Expression of intracellular Th1 and Th2 cytokines in women with recurrent
spontaneous abortion, implantation failures after IVF-ET or normal pregnancy. Am J Reprod Immunol 2002;48:77–86 (Background).
Nakagawa K, Kwak-Kim J, Ota K, Kuroda K, Hisano M, Sugiyama R, et al.
Immunosuppression with tacrolimus improved reproductive outcome of
women with repeated implantation failure and elevated peripheral blood
TH1/TH2 cell ratios. Am J Reprod Immunol 2015;73:353–61 (Level II).
Katz U, Achiron A, Sherer Y, Shoenfeld Y. Safety of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy. Autoimmun Rev 2007;6:257–9 (Background).
Hansen LM, Hardie BS, Hidalgo J. Fat emulsion for intravenous administration: clinical experience with intralipid 10%. Ann Surg 1976;184:80–8
(Background).
Pulsipher MA, Levine JE, Hayashi RJ, Chan KW, Anderson P, Duerst R, et al.
Safety and efﬁcacy of allogeneic PBSC collection in normal pediatric donors: the pediatric blood and marrow transplant consortium experience
(PBMTC) 1996-2003. Bone Marrow Transplant 2005;35:361–7
(Background).
€ttiger Y, Brattstro
€m C, Tyden G, S€awe J, Groth CG. Tacrolimus whole
Bo
blood concentrations correlate closely to side-effects in renal transplant recipients. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1999;48:445–8 (Background).

400
VOL. 110 NO. 3 / AUGUST 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

