Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Placenta
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/placenta

Abstracts for the forthcoming International Federation of Placenta
Associations Meeting 2010
Abstract Outline - IFPA 2010
Opening Keynote Plenary Session

(K1, NIH-SI)

A.2

Plenary Session 1 – Hypoxia

(PL1 – PL2)

A.2 – A.3

Plenary Session 2 - Immunology in the Placenta

(PL3 – PL5)

A.3 – A.4

Plenary Session 3 - Vascular Imaging and Angiogenesis
in the Placenta

(PL6 – PL9)

A.4 – A.6

Plenary Session 4 - SLIMP: Ion Channels in the Placenta

(PL10 – PL13)

A.6 – A.8

Plenary Session 5 - New Regulatory Mechanisms

(PL14 – PL16)

A.8 – A.9

Plenary Session 6 - Lipids and the Placenta

(PL17 – PL19)

A.9 – A.10

New Investigator Oral Session 1

(N1 – N6)

A.10 – A.12

New Investigator Oral Session 2

(N7 – N12)

A.13 – A.15

Early Career Researcher Plenary

(ECR1 – ECR2)

A.15 – A.16

Trophoblast Research Award

(TR1)

A.16

SLIMP Award Lecture

(SLIMP1)

A.17

Than Award Lecture

(THAN1)

A.17

Poster session 1

(P1.1 – P1.83)

A.17 – A.57

Poster session 2

(P2.1 – P2.84)

A.57 – A.96

Poster session 3

(P3.1 – P3.83)

A.97 – A.137

doi:10.1016/j.placenta.2010.08.006

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.2

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

Opening Keynote Plenary Session (K1, NIH-SI)
[K1]
FETAL AND NEONATAL PULMONARY CIRCULATION IN THE ALTO
ANDINO

Aníbal J. Llanos*, Germán Ebensperger, Emilio A. Herrera, Raquel A.
Riquelme, Roberto V. Reyes, Laboratorio de Fisiología y Fisiopatología del
Desarrollo, Programa de Fisiopatología, ICBM, Facultad de Medicina &
International Center for Andean Studies (INCAS) & Facultad de Ciencias
Químicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad de Chile; Departamento de Biología, Universidad de Tarapacá, Arica, Chile
Pregnancy at high altitude in women and animals cause pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAHT) in the newborns (1). Nevertheless neonatal
llamas in the altiplano did not have PAHT compared to lowland newborn
llamas. We found that carbon monoxide (CO) is an endogenous gas
produced by hemoxygenase that plays a key role as vasodilator agent in
the llama, with lesser action in the sheep (2). In contrast, basal NO role in
the pulmonary circulation in the high altitude llama was negligible, but
important in the neonatal sheep pulmonary circulation, that in spite of the
high NO tone had PAHT. We postulated that hemin, the oxidized form of
heme and hemoxygenase inductor, played a role through CO in the regulation of the pulmonary circulation in high altitude (HA) newborn lambs.
The Hemin Group showed basally a decrease in the basal PAP compare to
the Control Group. The pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) in the Hemin
Group did not show any change during a superimposed episode of hypoxia,
whereas the Control Group showed a signiﬁcant increase during the
hypoxemic period (3). These results may be due to augmented enzymatic
activity of sGC and/or to lesser vascular remodeling in the pulmonary
artery in the hemin treated neonates. We determined the sGC protein
expression and the histology of the small pulmonary arteries. We found
that Hemin Group had increased sGC protein expression and lesser smooth
muscle layer in the small pulmonary arteries, both ﬁndings consistent with
the decrease in PAP in the Hemin treated Group. Furthermore, we found
augmented CO production and increased protein expression of HO-1, HO2, BKCa and PKG1 in the lungs of Hemin Group, also consistent with lower
PAP than controls (4). In conclusion, hemin could be a good agent to
decrease pulmonary arterial hypertension in the neonate.
Supported by FONDECYT 1090355, 1080663-Chile.
(1) Herrera EA et al. Am. J. Physiol. 292:R2234-R2240, 2007.
(2) Herrera EA et al. Cardiovasc Res. 77:197-201, 2008.
(3) Ebensperger G. et al. Fetal and Neonatal Physiological Society Annual
Meeting, 2009.
(4) Ebensperger G. et al. VIII World Congress on High Altitude Medicine
and Physiology, 2010.

[NIH - SI]
EXPERIMENTAL SELECTION OF HYPOXIA-TOLERANT DROSOPHILA
MELANOGASTER: MAJOR ROLE FOR NOTCH ACTIVATION
Gabriel Haddad*, UCSD, United States
Through long-term laboratory selection (over 200 generations), we have
generated a Drosophila melanogaster strain that tolerates severe, normally
lethal, level of hypoxia. Because of initial experiments suspecting genetic
mechanisms underlying this adaptation, we compared the genomes of the
hypoxia-selected ﬂies with those of controls using deep re-sequencing. By
applying novel computing and analytical methods we identiﬁed a number
of DNA regions under selection, mostly on the X-chromosome. Several of
the hypoxia-selected regions contained genes encoding or regulating the
Notch pathway. In addition, expression proﬁling revealed an activation of
the Notch pathway in the hypoxia-selected ﬂies. We conﬁrmed the
contribution of Notch activation to hypoxia tolerance using a speciﬁc gsecretase inhibitor, DAPT, which signiﬁcantly reduced adult survival and
lifespan in the hypoxia-selected ﬂies. We also demonstrated that ﬂies with
loss-of-function Notch mutations or RNAi-mediated Notch knockdown
had a signiﬁcant reduction in hypoxia tolerance, but those with a gain-offunction had a dramatic opposite effect. Using the UAS-Gal4 system, we
also showed that speciﬁc over-expression of the Notch intracellular
domain in glial cells was critical for conferring hypoxia tolerance in ﬂies.
Novel analytical tools, genetic and bioinformatic strategies allowed us to
discover that Notch activation plays a major and unsuspected role in this
hypoxia tolerance in Drosophila melanogaster.
Plenary Session 1 - Hypoxia (PL1 - PL2)
[PL1]
OXYGEN EFFECTS, TROPHOBLAST BIOLOGY, AND CONTROVERSY: I
THINK I AM SUFFOCATING!
D.M. Nelson*, M. Tuuli, Washington University, United States
Oxygen is a necessity for life yet is toxic to cells when dysregulated. The
oxygen tension in villous tissues until 10-12 weeks’ gestation is  15 mm
Hg, but the pO 2 at  13 weeks’ gestation rises to 40-80 mm Hg and stays in
this range throughout the second and third trimesters. Maldevelopment of
the spiral arterioles in the ﬁrst trimester predisposes to placental
dysfunction and sub-optimal pregnancy outcomes in the second half of
pregnancy. Controversy is intense when investigators propose functional
roles for the anatomical maldevelopment of the basal plate and the oxygen
concentrations that are normal and abnormal in the placenta in the latter
parts of gestation. Placental hypoxia in the second half of pregnancy,
ischemia with re-oxygenation injury, mechanical damage due to high ﬂow,
or a combination of these phenomena are offered as contributory to
placental injury characteristic of placentas from women with pregnancy
disorders.
We consider variables that inﬂuence the conduct of experiments in vitro
when the aim is to mimic in vivo pathophysiology of the placenta. Most
hotly debated is the question of what oxygen percentage is reﬂective of
normal and abnormal oxygen concentrations that occur in vivo? We
discuss this controversy and then focus on our studies that show cultured
villous trophoblasts express phenotype related differences in their
response to insults generally, and hypoxia speciﬁcally. We conclude that all
in vitro models offer some advantages, and some disadvantages, when
used to evaluate the effects of insults on trophoblast function. We
recommend that investigators who do the actual experiments should
breathe 20% oxygen, not other concentrations. Otherwise, they, too, will
fall prey and suffocate with the controversy about what oxygen level is
ideal and how oxygen affects trophoblast biology and placental function.
(Supported by NIH 29190)
Keywords: trophoblast, oxygen, hypoxia

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[PL2]
THE EFFECTS OF OXYGEN ON NORMAL AND ABNORMAL PLACENTAL
TISSUE - INSIGHTS FROM METABOLOMICS
AEP Heazell*1, M Brown2, SA Worton1, WB Dunn1, 1Maternal and Fetal
Health Research Centre, University of Manchester, United Kingdom,
2
Manchester Centre for Integrative Systems Biology, University of
Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Centre for Advanced Discovery and
Experimental Therapeutics, Manchester Biomedical Research Centre, UK,
United Kingdom
Placental dysfunction is central to many complications of human pregnancy including preeclampsia (PE), fetal growth restriction and stillbirth.
The precise nature of placental dysfunction in these conditions in not
known, although oxidative and nitrative stress are implicated. Metabolomics can detect and identify endogenous and secreted metabolites in
vivo and in vitro. The metabolome describes the complete quantitative
collection of small molecular weight compounds which participate in
metabolism including amino acids, sugars, organic acids and lipids. Study
of the metabolome is advantageous as it represents the downstream
product of changes in transcription, translation and provides an accurate
snapshot of the biological phenotype.
We hypothesised that a metabolomic strategy could provide a reproducible technique to measure endogenous and secreted metabolites and
identify differences in placental cultures from pregnancies complicated by
PE and subjected to variations in oxygen tension. We used both gas and
liquid chromatography prior to mass spectrometry to separate and detect
1000s of metabolites. Univariate statistical analysis and Principal
Components Analysis were used.
We applied an established placental explant culture model to study the
“metabolic footprint” (changes in secreted metabolites in conditioned
culture medium) and the intra-tissue metabolome. Our early studies
conﬁrmed that experimental protocols need to be tightly controlled,
including culture medium content. The intra-assay variability was
acceptable 6.1-11.6%. We demonstrated changes in the tissue metabolome
and metabolic footprint in response to altered oxygen tension. We also
demonstrated that explants from normal tissue cultured in 1% oxygen
(hypoxia) had similarities to explants from PE cultured at 6% oxygen
(normoxia). The metabolite classes included lipid metabolism, glutamate
and glutamine, tryptophan metabolism and leukotriene or prostaglandin
metabolism. Metabolomics has the potential to identify changes in
conditions, such as PE, that are associated with placental pathology. The
work complements biomarker studies by providing pathophysiological
understanding, via biochemical studies, of complex disease phenotypes.
Keywords: Oxygen, Metabolism, Metabolomics, Placental Explants

A.3

Plenary Session 2 - Immunology in the Placenta (PL3 - PL5)
[PL3]
FETAL ANTIGENS: IDENTITY, ORIGINS, AND INFLUENCES ON THE
MATERNAL IMMUNE SYSTEM
M.G. Petroff*, University of Kansas Medical Center, United States
Hemochorial placentation represents an unusual physiological situation in
which there exists a vast interface between the mother and her genetically
disparate fetus. Together with this physical intimacy, the rapid rate of
turnover of the chorionic villous trophoblast in the human placenta via
shedding of apoptotic nuclei, microparticles and exosomes, results in the
release of high amounts of fetal products into the maternal blood stream.
Recent observations also reveal that the decidua of pregnancy is heavily
populated with lymphatic vessels. Together, these properties of the
placenta suggest at least two routes of trafﬁcking from the maternal-fetal
interface to secondary lymphoid organs draining the maternal blood and
uterus. Our laboratory has adopted a murine model in which a deﬁned
fetal antigen can be shown to access the central and peripheral lymphoid
organs released from the placenta-blood and/or trophoblast-decidua
interface. The result of this interaction appears to be induction of tolerance
to fetal antigen-speciﬁc CD4+ T cells, as evidenced by swift upregulation of
activation and inhibitory cell-surface proteins, as well as induction of fetal
antigen-speciﬁc regulatory T cells. In contrast, we found surprisingly
limited evidence of tolerance induction in CD8+ T cells – a result that was
correlated with reduced fetal viability in these animals. Investigations of
subcellular localization of deﬁned fetal antigens in human trophoblast
cells, fetal macrophages and fetal cord blood leukocytes provides the proof
of concept that fetal antigens originate from multiple sources that could
access the maternal lymphoid system via trophoblastic deportation,
microparticle and exosome release, and microchimerism.
Keywords: T Cells, Maternal-fetal interface, Tolerance, Placenta
[PL4]
HCG, REGULATORY T CELLS, AND PREECLAMPSIA
S Sharma*, Department of Pediatrics, Women and Infants Hospital-Alpert
Medical School of Brown University, United States
Pre-eclampsia (PE) is a devastating pregnancy-associated complication,
diagnosed by hypertension, proteinurea, and edema. Dysregulation in
hormonal activity, angiogenesis and immunity is considered to contribute to
the onset of PE. Our recent results suggest that hCG is a potent angiogenic
and immuno-modulatory factor. It is then possible that its dysregulation
may contribute to the onset of preeclampsia. The objective of our study was
to establish a serum-based causal link between non-functional hCG and PE
using in vivo and in vitro models. hCG levels in serum from normal and PE
patients were evaluated. Glycosylation of hCG present in serum from
normal and PE patients was determined by a sandwich-ELISA. In vitro
functional assays included serum-based MAPK signalling and angiogenic
cross-talk between the endothelial cells and trophoblasts. Pregnant wild
type and IL-10-/- mice were injected (gd 10, i.p) with either normal pregnancy serum (NPS) or PE serum (PES) with or without recombinant hCG. On
gd 16/17, blood pressure and pregnancy outcome were recorded. Urinary
albumin, creatinine, serum sFlt-1, sEng were measured and renal pathology
was monitored. On gd 12/13, splenic and uterine Treg cells (CD4+CD25
+FoxP3+) cells were monitored by FACS. Dysregulation of hCG signalling in
PES was demonstrated by defective ERK phosphorylation and disruption in
the endovascular cross-talk between trophoblasts and endothelial cells
which was reversed with rhCG. We observed higher levels of hCG in PES.
Glycosylation pattern showed excessive presence of Sialyl-Lewis a (SLea),
Sialyl-Lewis X (SLeX) and Lewis Y (LeY) on PES hCG. In vivo treatment with
PES resulted in signiﬁcant reduction in Treg cells at the maternal-fetal
interface accompanied by IUGR, hypertension, proteinuria and renal
pathology, typical features of preeclampsia. This was reversed by rhCG. Our
results will be discussed in the context of establishment of in vivo and in
vitro models of preeclampsia and reversal of pathology by rhCG.
Keywords: hCG, immunity, angiogenesis, proteinuric hypertension

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.4

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[PL5]
ACTIVATION OF INNATE IMMUNE TYPE CYTOTOTOXIC RESPONSES OF
UTERINE-NATURAL KILLER CELL IN THE FETAL-MATERNAL INTERFACE
AT Yamada*, PDA Lima, KY Degaki, JR Bianco, EMO Lippe, University of
Campinas, Brazil
Human CD56brightCD16dim and mouse CD3-CD122+ NK1.1-DX5- natural
killer (NK) cells are pregnancy speciﬁc subset of cytokine producing NK cell
that modulate positively the homeostasis of uterine environment for
successful pregnancy. On the other hand, this uterine-NK (uNK) cell
produce cytotoxic mediators like IFNg/TNFa pro-inﬂammatory cytokines
and contain perforin/granzymes in the granules for potential innate
immune type response. Since its ability to trigger cytotoxic activity
affecting the pregnancy is still controversial, our laboratory have evaluated
experimentally, the capability of uNK cells response to stress induced in
the maternal fetal interface of pregnant mice. The surgical disruption of
developing embryo in loco, induces increasing of vascular permeability at
the mesometrial endometrium as soon as 10 min, where the uNK cells
show loss of perforin and proteoglycan contents from the secretory
compartment and later (30-60min) the cathepsin D contents from lysosome compartment of granules suggesting releasing of cytolytic mediators. The gene expression proﬁle in this maternal-fetal interface also show
increasing of pro-inﬂammatory IFNg and TNFa cytokines after 60 min, but
not anti-inﬂammatory IL-6 or Fas/FasL pathway. After 6h of embryo
damage, most of the cells at the maternal-fetal interface, including
trophoblast cells becomes TUNEL positive. By utltrastructural analysis, the
uNK cell granules are heterogeneous and loosing of their contents is not
uniform and is time-dependent evidencing the occurrence of uNK functional subsets. Similar effects are seen in the uNK cells of pseudopregnat
mice uterus locally injected with amniotic ﬂuid and what component is
capable to induce direct or indirectly the quick response of uNK cells is one
of challenge to understand the mechanism of cytotoxic activation. Taken
all together, uNK cell is capable to trigger its cytotoxic response very fast
and seems to work like a sentinel and effector cell responsive to changes of
uterine environment homeostasis during pregnancy.
Keywords: uNK cell, cytotoxic, innate immune response, reproductive
immunology

Plenary Session 3 - Vascular Imaging and Angiogenesis in the Placenta
(PL6 - PL9)
[PL6]
PLACENTA MACROVASCULAR AND MICROVASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL
DYSFUNCTION IN DISEASES OF PREGNANCY
L Sobrevia*, JK Nien, F Abarzúa, P Casanello, Cellular and Molecular Physiology Laboratory (CMPL) & Perinatology Research Laboratory (PRL),
Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Research Centre (CIM),
School of Medicine, Faculty of Medic, Chile
Human endothelial dysfunction is a common feature in diseases of pregnancy such as gestational diabetes (GD), pre-eclampsia (PE) and intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Metabolic changes include altered
synthesis of nitric oxide (NO), and altered membrane transport of L-arginine and adenosine in primary cultures of human umbilical vein (HUVEC,
macrovascular) and placenta microvillous (hPMEC, microvascular) endothelial cells. These alterations are associated with modiﬁcations in the
expression and activity of endothelial (eNOS) and inducible (iNOS) NO
synthases, respectively, an effect maintained up to passage 5 in culture.
Expression and activity of the human cationic amino acid transporter 1
(hCAT-1) and equilibrative nucleoside transporters 1 (hENT1) and hENT2,
as well as the corresponding SLC7A1, SLC29A1 and SLC29A2 gene promoter
activities, is exhibited by these cell types. Altered gene expression results
from increased NO level, PKC, MAPK, hCHOP-C/EBPa and Sp1 transcription
factors activation. Reduced ENTs-mediated adenosine transport in GD and
PE is associated with stimulation of L-arginine/NO pathway. In addition,
hENT2 activity seems to intend to restore the reduced adenosine transport
in GD and PE. It is suggested that a common functional characteristic
leading to changes in the bioavailability of adenosine is evidenced by
human fetal micro and macrovascular endothelium in GD, PE and IUGR.
Supported by CONICYT ACT-73 (PIA), FONDECYT 1070865 & 1080534,
Chile.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[PL7]
THE ARTERIAL FETOPLACENTAL AND UTEROPLACENTAL VASCULATURE:
IMAGING REVEALS GESTATIONAL AND STRAIN DEPENDENT CHANGES
IN MICE
MY Rennie*1,2, A Rahman1, KJ Whiteley3, SL Adamson3,4, JG Sled1,2, 1Mouse
Imaging Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, Canada, 2Dept. of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Canada, 3Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Canada, 4Depts. of Ob/Gyn and Physiology,
University of Toronto, Canada
Objective: The determinants of vascular branching in the placenta are
poorly understood but likely depend on genetic, hemodynamic, and
environmental factors. Genetically distinct mouse strains may allow for
genetic dissection of branching morphogenesis regulation. The aim of the
present study was to quantify and compare placental vascular growth in
two of the most common mouse strains, C57Bl/6J (B6) and CD-1.
Methods: B6 and CD1 fetoplacental arterial trees from were infused with
X-ray contrast agent at embryonic day (E)13.5, 15.5 and 17.5. Uteroplacental arterial trees were perfused at E17.5 (N ¼ 7-9 /group), and 3-D
micro-CT images were obtained. Uteroplacental datasets were manually
segmented to obtain the volumes of speciﬁc vascular compartments.
Automated vascular segmentation software and ﬂow calculations were
used to analyze the fetoplacental trees.
Results: Despite similar late gestational placental weights, fetoplacental
arterial vascular volume increased by 71% in CD1 mice and 154% in B6 mice
from E13.5 to E17.5 (p<0.01). Both strains also increased the depth of their
fetoplacental tree suggesting an increase in labyrinthine thickness.
Surprisingly the number of small arteriole sized (50-100 mm) vessels did
not increase in late gestation in either strain. However B6 increased the
number of large vessel segments (>100 mm) by 80% (p<0.01) so that by
E17.5 B6 had 90% more large vessels than CD1. Arterial vascular resistance
decreased by 55% in B6 mice from E13.5-17.5 (p<0.05) but was unchanged
in CD1 mice. In contrast, the volume of uteroplacental spiral arteries and
maternal canals at E17.5 was double in CD-1 mice as compared to B6.
Conclusions: Quantiﬁcation of the placental vasculature using micro-CT
image analysis revealed signiﬁcant strain-dependent differences in late
gestational vascular expansion. These results suggest a signiﬁcant role for
genetics in determining fetoplacental and uteroplacental vascularity.
Funding: Supported by the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Ontario
Keywords: micro-computed tomography, fetoplacental vasculature,
uteroplacental vasculature, mouse

A.5

[PL8]
ANGIOGENIC AND VASODILATORY PLACENTAL NETWORK
G Valdes*, J Corthorn, Escuela Medicina Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica,
Chile
The angiogenic and invasive properties of the trophoblast are critical to
establish the placenta, and to transform the uterine arteries into large bore
non-reactive vessels. More recently, priming factors that facilitate invasion
by vasodilation have started to be identiﬁed.
VEGF is considered the paradigmatic angiogenic factor, but its hyperpermeabilizing and vasodilator effects have been overlooked. VEGF,
through its receptors Flt-1 and KDR activates eNOS, via phosphatidilinositol 3-kinase and phospholipase Cg1 respectively. Bradykinin, a vasodilator, angiogenetic and hyperpermeabilizing peptide, by activation of the
B2R receptor through Ca 2+ mediated mechanisms is also a potent stimulus of eNOS, and enhances the effect of VEGF; additionally the B2R
transactivates the KDR. Finally, NO also integrates this vasodilator, angiogenic and hyperpermeabilizing network. Different groups have shown in
humans immunoreactive expression of VEGF, Flt-1, KDR, B2R and eNOS in
villous cyto and syncytiotrophoblasts, fetal capillaries, and in extravillous
trophoblasts; moreover the B2R is expressed additionally in intraarterial
trophoblasts.
Using the model of the pregnant guinea-pig – the best non-primate
species to study trophoblast invasion – we have provided the ﬁrst
demonstration that VEGF, Flt-1, KDR, B2R and eNOS, are expressed in
labirynthine syncytiotrophoblast, interlobar trophoblasts, fetal endothelium, subplacenta, invasive, periarterial, intramural and intraarterial
trophoblasts, cells that have human morphological and functional
correlates.
We postulate that the coincident expression of these functionally interrelated factors in the placenta and in the invasive trophoblast supports an
angiogenic and vasodilator network that participates in placental development and in the different stages of the invasive pathway from the
anchoring villi/subplacenta to the vascular lumen. In vivo studies need to
be done to dissect the individual importance of the VEGF receptors, bradykinin and NO.
Studies in the guinea-pig were supported by grants 1050707-1080228
(Fondecyt, Chilean Agency of Science and Technology, Chile).
Keywords: angiogenesis, vasodilatation, placenta, guinea-pig

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.6

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[PL9]
FETO-PLACENTAL VASCULARIZATION: A MULTIFACETED APPROACH
Todros*1,

1

1

1

2

Plenary Session 4 - SLIMP: Ion Channels in the Placenta (PL10 - PL13)

1

E. Piccoli , A. Rolfo , S. Cardaropoli , C. Guiot , P. Gaglioti ,
T.
M. Oberto1, 1Department of Obstetrics and Neonatology, University of
Turin, Italy, 2Departmento of Neurosciences, Italy
The introduction of Doppler ultrasound technology allowed for the ﬁrst
time the in vivo study of normal and abnormal human feto-placental
hemodynamics. Doppler ﬂow velocity waveforms (FVW's) obtained from
the umbilical arteries (UA) give informations on downstream blood ﬂow
resistance. Pulsatility Index (PI), that quantiﬁes FVW's, decreases
throughout normal pregnancy, indicating decreasing blood ﬂow resistance. This ﬁnding has been related to previous knowledge about villous
tree development. Considering fetal cardiovascular physiology (i.e.
increasing perfusion pressure, increasing cross sectional area of UA, the
viscous and capacitive characteristics of the vascular bed) and that the
villous vessel network develops by dichotomous branching, it could be
demonstrated by mathematical models that PI values reﬂect vascular
villous development. PI values are high during the ﬁrst 15 – 20 weeks of
pregnancy, when the villous tree is mainly composed by mesenchimal and
intermediate immature villi. They start to decrease around 23 weeks of
gestation, when the placental villous tree develops in mature, stem and
terminal villi.
It was likewise observed that Fetal Growth Restriction (FGR) is characterized by higher PI values compared to age-matched controls, with the
highest values related to the most severe fetal outcomes. The next step was
to understand which are the abnormalities of the villous tree underlying
the abnormal FVW's. A number of studies using different approaches
(animal, in vitro and mathematical models, morphometrical, morphological and immunohistochemical assays) have shown that the worst FVW's
patterns are related to a highly abnormal vascular villous tree. Such
anomalies are expected to affect placental perfusion, that can be directly
monitored using 3D-4D power Doppler sonographic indexes. Indeed these
indexes are signiﬁcantly lower in pregnancies complicated by FGR with
abnormal UA FVW's.
The associated study of placental angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors in
these cases contributes to the understanding of the pathogenesis of the
condition, opening perspectives to innovative therapeutic interventions,
like controlling placental hypoxia by local delivery of oxygenated
biocompatible nanobubbles.

[PL10]
PLACENTAL MEMBRANE AND IONIC CHANNELS: EXPRESSION, ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY AND LIPID RAFTS (ABSTRACT PLENARY SESSION ON
ION CHANNELS IN THE PLACENTA)
G Riquelme*, Universityu of Chile, Chile
Human placental syncytiotrophoblast (hSTB) is an epithelium responsible
for materno-fetal exchange. As in other transport epithelia, ions play
multiple roles in human placental syncytiotrophoblast, being transported
from mother to fetus and regulating diverse cellular processes. We have
been interested in the characteristics of the functional expression of ions
channels from membrane fractions of hSTB. Since many functions of the
membranes are based on membrane dynamics and structure–function
correlation, the knowledge of the characteristics of the ionic channels and
its relationship with the domain, subdomain and microdomain of hSTB
membranes may play a role mediating different intracellular mechanisms
in the placental epithelial barrier that could directly relate to the maternofetal exchange. Methods: Highly puriﬁed membranes were obtained
through a double protocol of apical and basal membrane isolation which
includes differential centrifugations and basal membrane precipitation
with MgCl2. Using differential sucrose density migration we have obtained
basal membrane (BM) and described two isolated fractions from the apical
membrane: a classical fraction (MVM) and a light fraction (LMVM) where
MVM might correspond to the ﬁnger-like region and L-MVM could
correspond to the basal region of the microvillous. Puriﬁed membranes
were used in the reconstitution into giant liposomes or their transplantation into Xenopus oocyte membranes followed by electrophysiological recordings. Western blots using ion channel antibodies were
performed on apical and basal puriﬁed membrane fractions to support our
functional ﬁndings. We also reported the expression of functional microdomains (lipid rafts) in apical membranes that were studied using detergent resistant membranes (DRMs) and cholesterol sensitive depletion.
RESULTS: Our laboratory has worked on the characterization of several
chloride and cationic channels in the apical and basal membrane from
term human placentas. We also have reported the expression of two
functional microdomains (lipid rafts) in both membranes (LMVM and
MVM) and the importance of the cytoskeletal participation in their
different composition. CONCLUSION: Our results have contributed to the
information about ions channels present in the membranes from hSTB and
their implications in the physiology of this epithelium in normal and
pathological pregnancies. Supported by FONDECYT 1070695 (Chile).
Keywords: ions channels, Human syncytiotrophoblast, membrane,
lipid rafts

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[PL11]
REGULATION BY CALCIUM OF SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST POLYCYSTIN-2
(TRPP2) AND HETERO-COMPLEXES WITH TRPC1

A.7

[PL12]
POTASSIUM CHANNELS AND THE HUMAN PLACENTA
M Wareing*, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom

HF Cantiello*1,2, MdR Cantero2, 1Massachusetts General Hospital East,
United States, 2Laboratorio de Canales Iónicos CONICET, Argentina
Introduction: Transient receptor potential (TRP) channels contribute to
important sensory functions. Polycystin-2 (TRPP2, PC2) is a large conductance, non-selective cation channel, which permeates Ca2+. PC2 is abundantly expressed in term human syncytiotrophoblast (hST) and is
postulated as a principal contributor to Ca2+ delivery from mother to foetus.
TRPC1 is a store- and receptor-operated channel, which is also implicated in
Ca2+ entry. Both are co-expressed in the primary cilium of renal epithelial
cells. Recent studies demonstrated that PC2 and TRPC1 assemble to form
functional hetero-complexes with distinct functional properties. The PC2/
TRPC1 complexes show a single-channel conductance, ionic permeability
and pH dependence, which are distinct from those of either PC2 or TRPC1
alone. Little is known however, about Ca2+ regulation of either TRP channel
complex. In this study we review regulatory mechanisms of channel function and assessed the response to Ca2+ of either complex.
Methods: In vitro translated PC2 and TRPC1, hST PC2 and puriﬁed TRPC1/
PC2 hetero-complexes, were assessed for their response to Ca2+. Channels
were reconstituted in a lipid bilayer system exposed to a K+ chemical
gradient (150/15 mM). The Ca2+ chelating agents BAPTA and EGTA were
added to the cytosolic side to a ﬁnal Ca2+ concentration of 0.3 nM.
Results: The hST PC2 channel activity was inhibited by 70-100% in low
cytosolic Ca2+. Proteins extrinsic to the channel mediated this inhibitory
effect. Similar experiments conducted with TRPC1, showed Ca2+ sensitivity with a bell shaped Boltzmann's open probability in response to Ca2+.
Reducing cytosolic Ca2+ did not change either the I-V curve or the open
probability of the PC2/TRPC1 hetero-complex.
Discussion: The interaction between TRPC1 and PC2 in the hetero-complex
may confer different biophysical and physiological properties that the
observed in the homo-tetramers. Thus, Ca2+ is transported by, and regulates
the function of TRP channel activity present in the human placenta.
Keywords: Calcium transport, TRP channels, Human syncytiotrophoblast,
Lipid bilayer reconstitution

Potassium (K) channels are fundamentally important for normal cellular
function. This is highlighted by diseases directly linked to aberrant K
channel function. In the transporting epithelia of renal tubules, inactivating mutations in inwardly rectifying K (KIR) 1.1 channels have been linked
to Bartter's syndrome (1). Similarly, in cardiac myocytes numerous “loss of
function” mutations in voltage-gated K (KV) 7.1 channels are linked to the
long QT syndrome (2). The lack of experimental focus on placental K
channels, in particular with regard to regulation of nutrient transport and
blood ﬂow, may relate to the fact that as yet no pregnancy complications
have been directly attributable to a speciﬁc K “channelopathy”.
K channel activity is central to epithelial transport processes; therefore it is
no surprise that K channels are expressed by syncytiotrophoblast.
However our understanding of their role/s in syncytiotrophoblast renewal
and / or solute transport is limited.
K channels are also essential for vascular smooth muscle and endothelial
cell function. In the lung, K channels participate in the detection of local
oxygenation and the concerted response of vascular tissues to hypoxia.
KV1.5 channels may be particularly important; restoration of channel
expression in a rat hypoxia model restored function (3). Similar roles for K
channels have been proposed in placental vascular tissues (4); K channels
are expressed in fetoplacental vasculature (4, 5) but their functional
signiﬁcance remains to be elucidated.
Here we summarise current understanding of K channel expression and
activity in fetoplacental vasculature in normal and complicated
pregnancies.
1. Welling & Ho (2009). Am. J. Physiol. (Renal Physiol) 297: F849-63.
2. Peroz et al (2008). J. Physiol. 586.7: 1785-89.
3. Pozeg et al (2003). Circulation 107: 2037-44.
4. Hampl et al (2002). Am J. Physiol. (Heart) 283: H2440-9.
5. Wareing et al (2006) Am J. Physiol. (Regulatory) 291(2): R437-46.
Keywords: Potassium Channels, Vasculature, Human

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.8

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[PL13]
WATER CHANNEL PROTEINS IN THE HUMAN PLACENTA
AE Damiano*, Unvesidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina
In many tissues, water channel proteins known as aquaporins (AQPs) have
been implicated in transmembrane water transport. Previous research
suggested that water movement across human syncytiotrophoblast (hST)
should take place by a lipid diffusion pathway. However, in 2001 we
reported that aquaporin-9 (AQP9) and 3 (AQP3) are highly expressed in
hST from normal placenta. However, up to now, the physiological
function(s) and the regulation of human placental AQPs remain unknown.
We also reported that AQP9 protein expression was increased in
preeclamptic placentas while AQP3 was decreased. However, we could not
relate the higher AQP9 expression with its functionality for the transport of
water and mannitol.
Thus, we were focused on establishing the mechanisms that may modulate
AQP3 and AQP9 expression and functionality.
In placental explants cultured under hypoxia conditions we demonstrated
that changes in oxygen tension may be responsible for the dysregulation of
both proteins. In addition, insulin treatment decreased AQP9 but had no
effect on AQP3 expression.
On the other hand, we studied hST membranes lipid composition and
observed that the apical membrane ﬂuidity was reduced in preeclamptic
placentas. Furthermore, recently we found that CFTR expression was
almost undetectable in preeclamptic placentas and failed to regulate AQPs
activity suggesting that CFTR may be involved in the regulation of transcellular water ﬂux in human placentas.
In conclusion, our ﬁnding suggested that in preeclamptic placentas insulin
was not effective to down-regulate AQP9 expression, although AQP9 gen
has a negative insulin-response-element, and the intermittent hypoxia
contribute synergistically to its up-regulation. In contrast, AQP3 decrease
may be only caused by changes in oxygen tension. Our results also
proposed that the unfavorable lipid environment and the reduced
expression of CFTR may be affecting AQPs functionality. However, whether
the alterations of AQPs could play a role in the development of
preeclampsia is still unknown.
Keywords:
aquaporins,
syncytiotrophoblast,
human
placenta,
preeclampsia

Plenary Session 5 - New Regulatory Mechanisms (PL14 - PL16)
[PL14]
GENETIC AND EPIGENETIC VARIATION IN HUMAN PLACENTAS
ASSOCIATED WITH NORMAL OR ADVERSE PREGNANCY OUTCOMES
WP Robinson*, Luana Avila, Ryan Yuen, Dan Diego Alvarez, Maria Penaherrera, Peter von Dadelzsen et al, 1University of British Columbia, Canada,
2
Child & Family Research Inst., Canada
Background: Abnormal placental growth and function may be inﬂuenced
by genetic errors (e.g. trisomy) as well as epigenetic changes, such as those
involving altered DNA methylation. However, before an association
between DNA methylation and placental pathology can be investigated,
normal intra-placental variation and the effects of sample location, local
cell composition, gestational age, as well as mode of delivery and sample
processing needs to be understood.
Methods: To further our understanding of normal epigenetic variability
detailed sampling was obtained from 14 normal term placenta. Sites
exhibiting variable methylation (KISS1, PTPN6, CASP8, APC, AR, and LINE1)
were quantiﬁed by pyrosequencing. Expression of genes speciﬁc to
a subset of placental cells (CDH1, CDH11, ID2, PLAC1 and KISS1) were
evaluated by real-time PCR. In addition, 2-3samples from each from over
130 normal and IUGR/preeclampsia associated placentae were obtained
for evaluation of genetic (trisomy) and methylation changes (targeted and
by array-based approaches).
Results: Processing time (0-24 hours) had a dramatic effect on mRNA level
for most genes; while methylation tended to remain relatively constant
over this same time period. Considerable intra-placental variability was
observed that did not correlated with site location or depth. The patterns
of site-to-site correlation in expression and methylation from unrelated
genes suggest that some variability reﬂects chance cell-composition
differences between samples. Only a subset (up to 10% in the IUGR group)
of placentas show evidence of chromosomal trisomy, however, methylation changes can also be identiﬁeddadding new knowledge to the changes
associated with poor placentation.
Conclusion: Sites that are differentially methylated in different placental
cell types (e.g. KISS1 or PRPN6) can be used to infer cell composition
associated with abnormal placentation, while methylation differences that
are not inﬂuenced by cell type may be more informative for understanding
the cellular/physiological changes between normal and abnormal
placentae.
Keywords: Genetics, DNA methylation, Epigenetics

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[PL15]
FUNCTIONAL PHYLOGENOMIC DATA ELUCIDATE CONSERVED AND
DERIVED ASPECTS OF PLACENTA BIOLOGY
DE Wildman*1,2, 1Wayne State University, United States, 2Perinatology
Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, NIH, DHHS, USA, United States
The placenta is a complex organ, and the regulatory mechanisms that result
in its development are diverse. Moreover, it is the ﬁrst organ to be differentiated during development, and its anatomy varies extensively across the
clade of eutherian mammals. Phylogenetic studies have demonstrated that
the human hemochorial placenta is the ancestral type among placental
mammals. Comparative genomic analyses provide evidence for ancient
adaptive evolution (i.e. dN/dS>1) during the emergence of the eutherian
placenta in genes that are highly expressed in placentas of extant mammals.
Independent conﬁrmation that these genes are crucial in placentation
comes from knockout mice models that produce abnormal placental
phenotypes and/or result in embryonic or perinatal lethality. Despite the
great degree of conserved adaptations across many eutherian placenta
expressed genes, there is also evidence for lineage speciﬁc adaptations. In
addition to possessing genes with elevated rates of evolution, humans have
expanded gene families with placenta speciﬁc expression including galectins, gonadotropins and growth hormones. New data from comparative
placenta transcriptome studies highlight both evolutionarily conserved and
derived patterns of gene expression in placentas from diverse mammalian
species with a wide range of anatomical variation. Taken together, these
studies contribute to a comprehensive view of the evolution of the placenta
as well as identifying novel candidate genes for unravelling the regulation of
placenta development, function, and structure.
Keywords: transcriptome, evolution, gene gain and loss, phylogeny
[PL16]
PLACENTA-SPECIFIC MICRORNAS (MIRNAS) DERIVED FROM THE CHROMOSOME 19 MIRNA CLUSTER IN NORMAL PREGNANCY AND
PREECLAMPSIA
O Ishibashi*1, A Ohkuchi2, A Izumi2, S Matsubara2, T Takeshita1, T Takizawa1,
1
Nippon Medical School, Japan, 2Jichi Medical University, Japan
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are single-stranded non-coding RNAs of approximately 22 nucleotides in length, and accumulating evidence indicates that
they are involved in a variety of patho-physiological processes. Furthermore,
miRNAs have been investigated for the development of clinical diagnostic
and prognostic tools. We performed small RNA library sequencing using
human placental tissues, which led to the identiﬁcation of placenta-speciﬁc
miRNAs (e.g., MIR517A) linked to the chromosome 19 miRNA cluster
(C19MC). The miRNA cluster genes were differentially expressed in placental
development. Subsequent analyses by real-time PCR and in situ hybridization revealed that villous trophoblasts expressed placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs.
We also analyzed small RNA libraries from the blood plasma and showed
that the placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs were abundant in the plasma of pregnant
women. We also demonstrated the rapid clearance of the placenta-speciﬁc
miRNAs from the plasma after delivery, indicating that placenta-speciﬁc
miRNAs enter into maternal circulation. By using the trophoblast cell line
BeWo in culture, we demonstrated that miRNAs were extracellularly
released via exosomes. Taken together, our ﬁndings suggest that miRNAs are
exported from the human placental syncytiotrophoblast into maternal
circulation. Next, we determined differential expression of miRNAs in
placentas from normal and preeclampsia (PE) pregnancy quantitatively
using a real-time PCR-based miRNA array system. We identiﬁed 44 miRNAs
upregulated signiﬁcantly in placentas from PE pregnancy, 10 of which were
placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs in C19MC. Further, the in silico target genes of
some PE-related miRNAs were closely related to placenta functions.
Collectively, our study suggests that some miRNAs including placentaspeciﬁc miRNAs possibly regulates the expression of genes involved in
placenta functions and also that some miRNAs are dysregulated in PE
placentas. Since PE increases maternal and infant mortality and morbidity,
early detection of PE is one of the most important issues in Perinatology.
These miRNAs could serve as promising biomarkers for the diagnosis of PE.

A.9

Plenary Session 6 - Lipids and the Placenta (PL17 - PL19)
[PL17]
LIPID METABOLISM IN THE DIABETIC PLACENTA
A Jawerbaum*, Laboratory of Reproduction and Metabolism. CEFYBOCONICET. School of Medicine. University of Buenos Aires, Argentina
In maternal diabetes, the placenta is exposed to alterations in maternal
lipid metabolism, and is involved in the alterations in the quantity and
quality of the lipids that reach the fetal compartment. The excess of lipids
is present in the mother, the placenta and the fetus. Fetal lipid accretion is
related to the increased placental transport of glucose and lipids, and to
alterations in several placental lipid metabolic pathways. As a result of the
pro-inﬂammatory environment there is an increase in lipid peroxidation in
intrauterine tissues that leads to a loss of essential fatty acids (EFAs), which
are highly susceptible to peroxidation. EFAs have important functions as
signaling molecules in feto-placental development and metabolism. They
are ligands of the nuclear receptors PPARs, and substrates for the synthesis
of bioactive lipids such as prostacyclin, 15deoxyD12,14prostaglandinJ2 and
leukotriene B4, respective ligands of PPARd, PPARg and PPARa.
Results: By studying experimental models of diabetes and pregnancy, we
found that activation of the three PPAR isotypes regulates the synthesis
and catabolism of placental and fetal lipids. Their activation also induces
anti-inﬂammatory pathways in the placenta and the fetus. Altered
concentrations of PPARs and their endogenous ligands are found in
placentas and fetuses from diabetic rats. Dietary activation of PPARs in
maternal diabetes regulates lipid metabolic pathways and reduces matrix
metalloproteinases overactivity in the placenta, while it prevents lipid
accretion and reduces lipid peroxidation in the fetuses.
In conclusion, in maternal diabetes, the lipid overaccumulation and
impaired formation of bioactive lipids that activate PPARs challenge the
metabolism and function of the placenta as well as the development and
metabolism of the fetuses. Modulation of the quality and quantity of dietary lipids may help to regulate feto-placental lipid metabolism, proinﬂammation and impaired development in diabetic gestations.
Keywords: Diabetes, pregnancy, lipid, placenta
[PL18]
THE UPTAKE AND TRANSPORT OF MATERNAL LIPIDS TO THE FETUS
Laura Woollett*, University of Cincinnati, United States
The fetus has a high demand for lipids. Triglycerides and/or fatty acids are
used for energy and as membrane substrates. Cholesterol is used for
membrane substrates, as precursors for various signaling moieties, ie LXR,
and as mediators of membrane function, ie lipid rafts are cholesterol-rich.
Lipids can be derived from the various lipoproteins circulating in
maternal plasma. LDL and HDL are excellent sources of cholesterol. VLDL
and chylomicrons (CM) are sources of both cholesterol and triglycerides
and circulating levels can be readily manipulated. This is important
information assuming the amount of lipid presented to the fetus can
impact upon fetal growth rates. Optimal growth is important since
overgrowth as well as undergrowth can lead to age-related diseases.
Growth can be manipulated directly as a source of energy and
membranes for the fetus itself and can be indirectly involved by affecting
placental metabolism, ie placental signalling as a result of altered
membrane composition leading to a change in uptake and transport of
other growth-promoting nutrients.
Lipoproteins are taken up by lipoprotein receptors that are expressed on
the apical side of trophoblasts. Trophoblasts express a number of lipoprotein receptors that allow for uptake of all lipoproteins. Proteins are
also expressed that can mediate uptake of free fatty acids from the
circulation. Triglycerides and cholesteryl esters are hydrolyzed to fatty
acids and cholesterol which are utilized by cells or transported across the
cells to the basolateral side where the lipid moities are efﬂuxed or
secreted as free lipids, as simple complexes with proteins, or as
lipoproteins.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.10

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[PL19]
THE MOLECULAR FUNCTIONS OF PPARGAMMA IN THE PLACENTA
Y Barak*, Magee-Womens Research Institute, Dept of OBGYN and Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, United States
The nuclear receptor Peroxisome Proliferators-Activated Receptor gamma
(PPARg) is essential for placental development. To gain better understanding of PPARg function in the placenta, we screened for PPARg target
genes by integrating expression proﬁles of Pparg-null and Rxra-null
placentas, Pparg hemizygous placentas, trophoblast stem cells (TSC)
treated with a PPARg agonist, and Pparg-null TSC. Signiﬁcant overlaps
between proﬁles pinpointed plausible PPARg target genes. Microarray
analyses of placentas deﬁcient for the transcriptional coactivator AIB3
revealed that it has a ubiquitous role in the expression of putative PPARg
targets. Diverse spatial and temporal expression patterns of candidate
PPARg targets demonstrated that PPARg regulates genes at multiple stages
of trophoblast differentiation and in diverse combinations of trophoblast
lineages. A novel cohort of targets that encode interlinked metabolic
enzymes offers fresh insights into essential roles of PPARg in placental
energy metabolism. Our data provide new leads into the placental functions of PPARg and advance the basic understanding of placental development and metabolism in general.
Keywords: PPARgamma, placenta, trophoblast, microarrays
New Investigator Oral Session 1 (N1 - N6)
[N1]
ANTENATAL
GLUCOCORTICOID
TREATMENT
DOWN-REGULATES
SYSTEM A TRANSPORT IN THE MURINE PLACENTA
MC Audette*1, JRG Challis1,2, SG Matthews1, 1The University of Toronto,
Canada, 2Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research, Canada
Introduction: Synthetic glucocorticoids (sGCs), which are administered to
women threatened with preterm labour, differentially regulate the system
A amino acid transporter in vitro, but there is no comparable data in vivo.
Sincee30% of women who receive sGCs carry to term, our objective was to
examine the short and long-term consequences of antenatal sGCs on
placental system A transport using a murine model. We hypothesized that
sGC treatment would differentially regulate placental system A transport
based on timing from sGC exposure.
Methods: System A transplacental transport (measured using speciﬁc
substrate 14C-methylamino-isobuytyric acid) was characterized in pregnant C57BL/6 mice in mid-late gestation on embryonic day (E) 12.5, E15.5
and E18.5 (n¼6; termeE19.5). Secondly, pregnant dams were treated with
either saline or dexamethasone (DEX; 0.1mg/kg) on E13.5 and E14.5 to
assess short-term (E15.5) and long-term (E17.5, E18.5) consequences of
sGC treatment on system A activity (n¼5-8). Changes in passive permeability (14C-mannitol; n¼3) were examined. We also determined whether
these effects were sex-speciﬁc.
Results: System A transport increased from E12.5 to E18.5 (p<0.01). DEX
treatment had no short-term effect at E15.5 or E17.5, but resulted in
a signiﬁcant decrease in system A transport prior to term at E18.5 (p<0.05),
in both sexes. DEX did not affect passive permeability of the placenta or
fetal weight. Female fetuses appear more susceptible to reduced placental
growth, as DEX reduced female placental weight at E18.5 (p<0.05).
Discussion: System A transport dramatically increased over the second
half of gestation, consistent with increased fetal growth. There are no
short-term effects of mid-gestation sGC treatment, however a substantial
reduction in system A mediated transport occurred when gestation
persists to term. As such, prenatal use of sGC therapy may lead to
a reduction in availability of neutral amino acids and alter fetal
development.
Funding: Canadian Institutes for Health Research.
Keywords: System A, Synthetic Glucocorticoids, Amino acid transport

[N2]
HIGH DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN (HDL) REGULATES PLACENTAL VASCULAR
TONE INDEPENDENT OF ENDOTHELIAL NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE
(ENOS)
Manuela Augsten1, Gerald Wölkart2, Kurt Schmidt2, Bernd Mayer2, Gernot
Desoye1, Christian Wadsack*1 et al, 1Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Medical University of Graz, Austria, 2Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Karl-Franzens University of Graz, Austria
Introduction: Blood ﬂow in the human feto-placental circulation is
regulated by a variety of vasoactive molecules. NO, enzymatically
produced by eNOS, is a potent endothelium-derived vasodilator. eNOS
activation can be promoted by HDL through its binding to the scavenger
receptor class B type 1 (SR-BI). Recently, we demonstrated SR-BI and eNOS
expression on placental endothelial cells and HDL binding to SR-BI. Here
we hypothesized that HDL could be a potent eNOS/NO mediated vasodilator in the feto-placental vascular system.
Methods: Immunoblotting was performed to detect eNOS phosphorylation after placental endothelial cells were treated with fetal HDL. eNOS
activity was measured by the conversion of L-argingine to L-citrulline.
Vasoactive ex vivo capacity of HDL was investigated by wire myography.
The vessels were precontracted with the thromboxan mimetic U46619,
HDL was supplied and the vasoactivity was measured. Different
inhibitors of eNOS (L-LAME), cyclooxygenases (COX) (Diclofenac,
Indomethacin) and of SR-BI receptor (BLT-1) were added to identify
activated resistance mechanisms.
Results: Neither phosphorylation nor activation of the eNOS [HDL
(1.500.4%) vs control (1.650.8%); n¼4] were induced by HDL. However,
HDL showed a signiﬁcant endothelial dependent dilatation of placental
arteries (-756%) and veins (-774%) after precontraction in wire myography. This vasoactivity could not be blocked neither by eNOS nor by COX
inhibitors, whereas BLT-1 totally inhibited HDL-mediated vasodilatation in
placental vessels.
Conclusion: HDL is a potent SR-BI-mediated vasodilator in the fetoplacental circulation. This is independent of eNOS activation and of the
cyclooxygenase-prostacyclin cascade. We speculate that the HDL-mediated vasodilatation involves the endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing
factor (EDHF), which would represent a novel regulator of feto-placental
vasotonus, but this needs further investigation. (Austrian Jubilee Fund
12601 to GD and 13533 to CW)
Keywords: High denisty lipoprotein (HDL), vasodilatation, Scavenger
receptor class B typ-1, endothelium derived hyperpolarizing factor (EDHF)

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.11

[N3]
PLACENTAL VASCULATURE REMODELING BY ADENOVIRAL-MEDIATED
PLACENTAL GENE THERAPY OF INSULIN GROWTH FACTOR (AD-HIGF1) IN A MOUSE MODEL OF PLACENTAL INSUFFICIENCY (PI)

[N4]
THE EFFECT OF LOW SHEAR STRESS ON TROPHOBLAST-INDUCED
ENDOTHELIAL CELL APOPTOSIS INVOLVED IN SPIRAL ARTERY
REMODELLING

Jaehee Chung, Helen Jones, Foong-Yen Lim, Sundeep Keswani, Timothy
Crombleholme, Mounira Habli*, Cincinnati Children Medical Center,
United States

JL James*, GS Whitley, JE Cartwright, St George's University of London,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Recent work in our lab showed that Ad- hIGF-1 restores
fetal weight in rat, rabbit and mouse models of PI. The mechanism of action
of Ad-hIGF-1 is unknown. We hypothesize that Ad-hIGF-1 restores fetal
weight in a murine PI mice model through remodeling of the placental
vasculature.
Methods: Time mated pregnant C57 Black /6J mice were divided into 4
groups :1-Sham operated control 2- PI induced by mesenteric uterine
artery ligation (MUAL)3-MUAL with Ad-Lacz 1x108 pfu 4-MUAL with AdIGF-I 1x108 pfu. At gestational day 18, through laparotomy MUAL was
performed and treatment was administered. Cesarean delivery was done
on day 20. Fetal and placental weights recorded. Morphometric analysis of
labyrinth depth and vascular density was performed following immunohistochemical staining with endothelial speciﬁc MECA 32. Expression of
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A), Angiopoietin-1 & 2 (Ang1 & 2) and soluble FMS-related Tyrosine Kinase (sFLT) was assessed by
qPCR and IHC.
Results: Placental labyrinth depth in MUAL group(679.7  57.9 um) (n¼3)
was signiﬁcantly reduced by 23% (p<0.05) and 26%in comparison with
sham-operated(887.3 65.3 um, n¼5) and MUAL with Ad-IGF-1(913 
50.1 um, n¼2) respectively. Similarly, a signiﬁcant reduction in fetal vessel
counts was recorded by 28 % (37  1.5 vs. 50 1.9, p<0.05) and 31%(37 
1.5 vs. 54 1.6) in the ligated group as compared to the sham-operated and
MUAL with AD-IGF-1 respectively. No changes were seen in the RNA
expression levels of any of the angiogenic factors among the 4 groups. IHC
showed increased Ang-2 expression in the MUAL group as compared to
others. In contrast, both sFLT and VEGF-A expression were increased in the
MUAL with Ad-HIGF-1 group.
Conclusion: Placental vascular remodeling may be one of the mechanisms
by which placental gene transfer of IGF-1 restore fetal weight in a surgical
mouse model of PI.
Keywords: Placental insufﬁciency, gene therapy, angiogensis

Background: In the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy trophoblast migrate along
uterine spiral arteries (SA) and replace endothelial cells (EC) lining these
vessels by mechanisms that may involve EC apoptosis. Inadequacies in SA
remodelling have been associated with pre-eclampsia and IUGR. Until 1012 weeks of gestation trophoblast plug SA, preventing maternal blood ﬂow
into the intervillous space, resulting in slow, high resistance ﬂow in these
vessels. This work aimed to determine the effect of shear stress on
trophoblast-induced EC apoptosis.
Methods: Cells were cultured using the BioFlux200 system. SGHPL-4, Jar,
primary extravillous trophoblast (EVTs) and HUVECs were cultured for 1230hrs under 0.02-7dyne/cm shear stress. Apoptosis was quantiﬁed by
time-lapse microscopy.
Results: 1) Shear stresses from 0.02-3dyne/cm did not induce SGHPL-4, Jar
or HUVEC apoptosis. 2) TNFa/Actinomycin-D induced signiﬁcantly less
apoptosis in trophoblast cultured in 3dyne/cm than in 0.5dyne/cm
cultures (p<0.05). This protective effect was seen to a small extent in
HUVECs cultured at 3dyne/cm, but was not signiﬁcant. 3) Jars and EVTs
cultured on HUVEC monolayers at 0.5 or 3dyne/cm signiﬁcantly induced
apoptosis in directly adjacent HUVECs, in comparison to HUVECs >2 cells
away or HUVEC only controls (p<0.05), with a progressive decrease in the
amount of apoptosis induced from 0.5 to 3 to 5dyne/cm cultures (p<0.05).
However, Jars failed to signiﬁcantly induce HUVEC apoptosis in 5 or 7dyne/
cm cultures. Blocking antibodies to Fas-ligand inhibited the ability of Jars
to induce apoptosis in adjacent HUVECs.
Conclusions: Trophoblast demonstrate a survival advantage over HUVEC
at low levels of shear stress (3dyne/cm). Jars and EVTs are able to induce
HUVEC apoptosis in this model by Fas/Fas-ligand interactions in a similar
manner to trophoblast in vivo, and this process is inhibited by increasing
shear stress. Therefore, low shear stresses in plugged ﬁrst trimester SA may
aid trophoblast-induced EC apoptosis involved in SA remodelling.
Keywords: Shear Stress, Endothelial cell apoptosis, Trophoblast, Spiral
artery remodelling

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.12

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[N5]
RHOA/ROCK SIGNALLING PATHWAY IS NOT IMPLICATED IN ENOS INACTIVATION BY HYPOXIA IN HUMAN UMBILICAL VEIN ENDOTHELIAL
CELLS

[N6]
CHANGES IN DNA METHYLATION PATTERNS THROUGHOUT HUMAN
PREGNANCY: IMPLICATIONS FOR EVOLUTION, FUNCTION AND
BIOMARKER DISCOVERY

CP Prieto*, L Sobrevia, P Casanello, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Chile

B Novakovic*1,2, L Gordon3, A Sharkey4, A Moffett4, J Craig1,2, R Saffery1,2,
Developmental Epigenetics Group, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia,
2
Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Australia, 3Clinical
Epidemiology and Biostatistics Unit, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia,
4
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom

Regulation of blow ﬂow to the placenta depends on structural changes and
vasoactive factors, mainly to nitric oxide (NO). NO derives from the
metabolism of L-arginine to NO and L-citrulline by the NO synthase (NOS).
Reduced endothelial NOS (eNOS) activity has been implicated in vascular
dysfunction, and a competition over the L-arginine availability has been
described between eNOS and arginases (ARG). Due to its role in vascular
dysfunction, the RhoA/ROCK signaling pathway could be implicated in the
regulation of eNOS expression and/or activity, through its phosphorylation
on serine1177 (i.e., activated eNOS, p1177~eNOS) or threonine495 (i.e., inactivated eNOS, p495~eNOS) and/or arginase II (ARGII). We studied the role of
the RhoA/ROCK pathway on eNOS and ARG expression in human umbilical
endothelium (HUVEC) under hypoxia.
Methods: HUVEC primary cultures were exposed to normoxia (5% O2) or
hypoxia (2% O2) for 0-24 hours. Cells were exposed to S-(2-boronoethyl)-Lcysteine (BEC, arginase inhibitor, 100 mM) or fasudil (ROCK inhibitor, 10
mM). RhoA, phosphorylated ERM (p~ERM, index of activated RhoA/ROCK
signalling pathway), ARGII, total eNOS, pSer1177~eNOS and pThr495~eNOS
were determined by western blot.
Results: Higher pThr495~eNOS paralleled by reduced pSer1177~eNOS, with no
signiﬁcant changes in total eNOS was observed in hypoxia (24 hours), an
effect unaltered by fasudil or BEC. In hypoxia, total eNOS protein abundance did not change with fasudil. No changes were observed in RhoA
under hypoxia or in the presence of BEC. Hypoxia induced ARGII expression, an effect unaltered by fasudil. RhoA and peERM were neither modiﬁed
in hypoxia nor with fasudil.
Conclusions: ARGII over-expression, together with reduced pSer1177~eNOS
and increased pThr495~eNOS could explain the endothelial dysfunction
exhibited by HUVEC exposed to hypoxia, a phenomenon that seems
independent on the RhoA/ROCK signalling pathway.
Supported by FONDECYT 1080534 & 1070865, CONICYT ACT-73 (PIA) & AT24090200, Chile. C.P. holds a CONICYT-PhD fellowship.
Keywords: eNOS, Arginase, Hypoxia, RhoA/ROCK pathways

1

DNA methylation is the most commonly studied epigenetic modiﬁcation,
and is involved in the control of gene expression and maintenance of
chromosome stability. DNA methylation marks are potentially reversible,
and can be altered by environmental factors, such as diet, drug/alcohol
abuse, and stress. Recent studies searching for biomarkers of fetal and
placental disease have identiﬁed DNA methylation differences between
placenta and maternal blood; however most of these studies have used
term placenta methylation as a proxy of ﬁrst trimester methylation status.
This is potentially ﬂawed, because a recent preliminary study, identiﬁed
differences in placental DNA methylation between <34 and >34 weeks.1
We hypothesise that the proﬁle of DNA methylation within the placenta
varies over time in association with the developmental stage of pregnancy.
Further we speculate that environmental changes throughout gestation
inﬂuence this process and are associated with the adaption of the developing pregnancy to the in utero environment. The aim of the current study
was to analyse changes in DNA methylation on a genome-scale level
between three gestational ages, 8 weeks, 12 weeks and term.
Genome-scale DNA methylation analysis was performed using the Illumina Inﬁnium HumanMethylation27 platform, which analyses 27,578 CpG
sites covering 14,595 genes.
Our analysis revealed a large number of CpG sites that change signiﬁcantly
throughout placental development (650 probes showed absolute differences of 20% between ﬁrst trimester and term). We found very few
differences between 8 and 12 weeks, suggesting a relative robustness in
DNA methylation during this period. We also found evidence of greater
variation between placentas from different individuals at term, potentially
as a response to environmental inﬂuences throughout gestation. Our study
has revealed a suite of ﬁrst trimester-speciﬁc placental DNA methylation
markers with potential utility for development of novel diagnostic tests for
placenta-associated diseases of pregnancy.
1
Yuen et al., EJHG, 2010
Keywords: Epigenetics, DNA methylation, Gestation, ﬁrst trimester

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

New Investigator Oral Session 2 (N7 - N12)
[N7]
DECIDUAL HOXA10 REGULATES TROPHOBLAST MIGRATION IN VITRO
Geeta Godbole*1, Pankaj Suman1,2, Satish Gupta1,2, Deepak Modi1, 1National
Institute for Research in Reproductive Health, India, 2National Institute of
Immunology, India
The initiation of pregnancy requires coordinated differentiation of the
maternal endometrial stroma in to the decidua and the embryonic
trophoblast tissue. Several factors secreted by decidual cells and trophoblast cells make an ideal micro-environment for the initial attachment of
blastocyst to the receptive endometrium. Based on several in vitro experiments it has been shown that the decidua regulates trophoblast migration/invasion and this regulation is necessary to dictate the degree of
placentation. However, the genetic players that regulate this differentiation have not been identiﬁed. Previous studies have identiﬁed the
Homeobox gene HOXA10 as an important factor involved in decidualization. Mice knockout for HOXA10, or human decidual cells knocked down
for HOXA10 have defective decidualization underscoring the importance
of this factor. Since decidua regulates trophoblast migration and as
HOXA10 is required for decidual response, we hypothesized that loss of
HOXA10 in the decidual cells must affect trophoblast migration.
To investigate in to this hypothesis, we knocked down HOXA10 expression
in the decidual cells by siRNA and used the supernatants in an in vitro assay
to determine trophoblast invasion. The trophoblastic cell lines JEG3, ACH3P and HTR-8SV/neo were employed for the study. Invasion was assessed
by Matrigel invasion assay, changes in gene expression of invasion related
genes viz Integrin subunits alpha 5,6, v, Matrix metalloprotease (MMP) 2, 3
and 9 and Tissue Inhibitor of MMPs (TIMPs) 1, 2 and 3 was assessed by
realtime PCR and phosphorylation of STAT3 in trophoblast cell lines was
studied by western blotting.
The results revealed that as compared to control medium, in absence of
decidual HOXA10, the invasion of all the three cell lines increased by two
fold. At the molecular level, this increase in invasion was associated altered
expression of alpha 5 and alpha v, MMP2, 3 & 9 and TIMP 1,2,3, and activation of STAT3.
These observations for the ﬁrst time demonstrate that HOXA10 in the
decidua regulates trophoblast invasion. At the molecular level, this ability
is derived by the virtue of HOXA10 to regulate decidual secretome which
inﬂuences integrins, MMP and TIMP transcription in the trophoblastcells.
Keywords: Trophoblast Invasion, HOXA10, Decidua, Endometrium

A.13

[N8]
SYNCYTIAL NUCLEAR AGGREGATES ARE NOT UNIVERSALLY APOPTOTIC
IN NATURE AND ARE CLOSELY ASSOCIATED WITH CYTOKERATIN,
b-ACTIN AND b-TUBULIN
SJ Coleman*, L Gerza, CJP Jones, CP Sibley, JD Aplin, AEP Heazell
University of Manchester, United Kingdom
Introduction: Syncytial nuclear aggregates (SNA) are clusters of nuclei
found in the syncytiotrophoblast of the human placenta. The origin and
fate of SNAs is unknown and contrasting theories exist. SNAs may have
a role in disease as their number is increased in common pregnancy
pathologies. We hypothesise that SNAs are formed by cytoskeletal protein
interactions with nuclei, and that SNAs are not exclusively apoptotic.
Methods: Fresh placental villous tissue was ﬁxed and wax-embedded
(n¼7). Apoptosis was assessed on single sections by staining for M30 and
TUNEL. a-tubulin, b-tubulin, b-actin, g-actin, cytokeratin-7, dynein intermediate-chain-1 and kinesin 5B were localised using immunoﬂuorescence. An archive of electron micrographs was reviewed to investigate
nuclear morphology and surrounding cytoskeletal proteins.
Results: At term, 20% to 26.5% of SNAs contained apoptotic material as
tested by TUNEL and M30 respectively (Figure 1). Immunoﬂuorescence
showed cytokeratin-7 in syncytiotrophoblast associated with SNAs. btubulin and b-actin were found throughout the trophoblast and underlying
some SNAs. a-tubulin and g-actin were observed throughout the trophoblast but were not associated with SNAs. Dynein intermediate chain 1 was
found sparsely at localised regions in the trophoblast but was not associated with SNAs. Transmission electron microscopy conﬁrmed that intermediate ﬁlament arrays often surround SNAs. It also showed various
morphologically distinct stages of apoptosis in nuclei within the same SNA.
Discussion: Only a minority of SNAs contain apoptotic nuclei, suggesting
they may serve different functions, rather than just the extrusion of senescent nuclei as has previously been suggested. Cytoskeletal proteins, and
especially cytokeratin, were found within and surrounding SNAs and may
have a role in forming or maintaining these nuclear clusters. Further
research is required to determine how cytoskeletal proteins are involved in
SNA formation, and how apoptosis is activated in speciﬁc SNA nuclei.

ĂFigure 1. Graph showing proportion of SNAs with nuclei showing signs of apoptotic
cell death shown by M30 immunostaining and TUNEL respectively. Grade 0 ¼ no
staining, Grade 1 ¼ weak staining in one nucleus, Grade 2 ¼ strong staining in one or
more nuclei.

Keywords: syncytiotrophoblast, syncytial nuclear aggregates, apoptosis,
cytoskeleton

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.14

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[N9]
CERAMIDE, ACID SPHINGOMYELINASE AND CERAMIDASE EXERT
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS ON TROPHOBLAST DIFFERENTIATION AND
FUSION
AT Singh*1,2, A Dharmarajan2, JA Keelan1, 1School of Women's and Infants’
Health, University of Western Australia, Australia, 2Department of
Anatomy and Human Biology, University of Western Australia, Australia
Introduction: Although trophoblast syncytialisation has been actively
investigated for decades, various contradicting theories describing the
fundamental nature of trophoblast differentiation and fusion exist. A
realisation that the biochemical and morphological features of trophoblast
differentiation can be dissociated has surfaced in recent ﬁndings. We have
previously demonstrated a novel role of Ceramide, and sphingolipid
synthesis/metabolic enzymes in trophoblast differentiation. To clarify the
role of sphingolipid metabolism in the syncytialisation process, we have
further dissected the distinct roles of Ceramide in differentiation and
fusion, and the signalling pathways involved in this process.
Methods: Cultured cytotrophoblasts, isolated from term human placentas
were allowed to differentiate over 7 days in culture. Trophoblast differentiation was assessed by measuring hCG secretion, placental alkaline
phosphatase (PLAP) activity and E-cadherin expression and
immunostaining.
Results: Exposure of trophoblasts for 72 hours to short chain Ceramide,
acid sphingomyelinase (aSMase) and a ceramidase inhibitor (B13)
enhanced hCG secretion, indicating a role for Ceramide in differentiation
but not fusion. No changes were detected in PLAP activity. Syncytialised
trophoblasts expressed high levels of ceramidase, suggesting that this
enzyme may be involved in maintaining the syncytial phenotype.
Consistent with this view, B13 treatment reduced fusion as shown by
enhanced E-cadherin expression. Inhibition of the Ceramide-responsive
pathways JNK-II and PP2A did not abolish the effects of Ceramide, and in
fact increased hCG production while having divergent effects on fusion
(PLAP and E-cadherin).
Discussion: This study highlights the complexity of the pathways that
regulate trophoblast differentiation and fusion (syncytialisation). Different
agents (e.g. Ceramide) can regulate differentiation independently of effects
on fusion, while regulators of fusion can have no or even opposite effects
on differentiation. Pregnancy complications such as preeclampsia, where
a moderate increase in syncytialisation is observed with no effect on
differentiation, may be the end result of perturbations in one or more of
these pathways.
Keywords: Differentiation, Fusion, Ceramide, trophoblast

[N10]
INVOLVEMENT OF THE TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR KLF6 IN HUMAN
TROPHOBLAST DIFFERENTIATION
A. Racca*, S. Camolotto, S. Genti-Raimondi, G.M. Panzetta-Dutari,
Universidad Nacional de Cordoba, Argentina
Krüppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) is a ubiquitous zinc ﬁnger transcription factor
involved in differentiation, cell cycle control and proliferation in several cell
systems. In human and mice placenta, KLF6 is highly expressed and klf6-/knockout mice exhibit impaired placental development. An increase in KLF6
expression during morphological and biochemical differentiation of cytotrophoblasts (CTB) and Jeg3 cells, was previously demonstrated. Here in, we
postulate that KLF6 is an important regulator of genes implicated in
trophoblast differentiation. Initially, we investigated whether KLF6 regulates
the promoter activity of pregnancy-speciﬁc glycoprotein (PSG) genes, which
are early markers of trophoblast differentiation. Transfection assays in
trophoblast cells demonstrate that KLF6 transactivates PSG3 and PSG5 gene
promoter constructs in a dose-dependent manner, an activation enhanced
when cells are differentiated. Moreover, the KLF6 carboxy-terminal zinc
ﬁnger DNA-binding domain is required for transactivation, and gel shift
assays indicate that KLF6 speciﬁcally interacts with the PSG promoter region.
Furthermore, qRT-PCR assays reveal that KLF6 overexpression induces
endogenous mRNA levels of not only PSG3 but also human chorionic
gonadotrophin b-subunit and the glial cell missing 1 (GCM1) trophoblast
speciﬁc transcription factor, both strongly involved in trophoblast differentiation. Interestingly, the PSG promoter is activated by GCM1 and by KLF6
suggesting that cooperation between both transcription factors is, at least in
part, responsible for the markedly increase in PSG transcript levels observed
in CTB differentiation. To conclude, these results provide further evidence for
a role of KLF6 as a transcriptional regulator of genes in trophoblastic cells and
suggest that it might be involved in villous CTB cell differentiation., Supported by CONICET, FONCyT, MinCyT of Córdoba and SECyT-UNC
Keywords: transcriptional regulation, trophoblast cells, differentiation

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.15

[N11]
CYTOMEGALOVIRUS IS HARBOURED BY THE PLACENTA THROUGH
REVERSIBLE BINDING TO HEPARAN SULPHATE PROTEOGLYCANS

[N12]
EXPRESSION OF CHEMOKINE (C-C MOTIF) LIGAND 25 AND ITS
RECEPTOR CCR9 DURING EMBRYO IMPLANTATION IN MOUSE

A Davey*, L Eastman, DG Hemmings, The University of Alberta, Canada

R.B. Weingrill*1, M.S. Hoshida1, C.D. Martinhago2, E. Bevilacqua1, 1Laboratory of Trophoblast Biology, Institute of Biomedical Science, University of
São Paulo - Brazil, Brazil, 2RDO Diagnósticos Médicos – São Paulo – Brazil,
Brazil

Introduction: Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is the most common
cause of congenital infection in newborns. One mechanism for viral
transmission is across the syncytiotrophoblast (ST) layer of the placenta.
The ST is extensively microvilliated, presents a large surface area to
maternal blood and has high levels of heparan sulphate proteoglycans
(HSPGs) to which HCMV initially binds. We hypothesized that HCMV is
protected by reversibly binding to ST on HSPGs, speciﬁcally Syndecan-1
(Syn-1). This leads to accumulation of HCMV in the placenta and increases
the risk of fetal transmission by virtue of its localization.
Methods: In a clinical based pilot study, viral load was quantiﬁed by q-PCR
in placentas, maternal blood and urine. Cultured ST were challenged with
HCMV, or HCMV treated with Heparin, at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) ¼
10 for 4 hours, extensively washed and then further incubated. Supernatants
and cell lysates were then assayed for infectious virus. The expression of
Syn-1 was also assessed in cultured ST in the presence or absence of HCMV.
Results: Over 50 patient samples have been assessed to date (maternal
blood, urine and placental tissue); 4 out of 51 samples have tested positive
for HCMV in placental tissue only. In vitro studies showed that reversible
binding was reduced when HCMV was pre-treated with heparin. Cellsurface Syn-1 expression decreased as HCMV MOI increased when
compared to unchallenged controls.
Discussion: Our results indicate that HCMV is harboured preferentially in the
placenta and may be protected from inactivation through reversible binding
to HSPGs. The perseverance of HCMV allows high viral levels to accumulate in
and around the ST thereby increasing the potential for transmission to the
fetus. Conversely, the cell-surface reduction in Syn-1 expression as the
amount of virus inoculum increases suggests protective cellular mechanisms
reduce potential viral receptor expression in the presence of infectious virus.
Keywords: Human cytomegalovirus, Binding, Fetal, Maternal

Background: Interactions between the blastocyst/trophoblast and uterine
tissues during embryo implantation are partly mediated by cytokines and
chemokines. CC’ and CXC’ terminal chemokines are known to be involved
with blastocyst polarity with the uterus, leukocyte recruitment and
capture/coordination of leukocyte migration. In particular, the chemokine
Ccl25 is highly expressed in the thymus, in periosteum progenitor cells and
mesenchymal stem cells (inducing gene activation, cell polarity, reorganization of membranes and cytoskeleton and migration) and also in the
mouse post implantation trophoblast.
Objectives: The aim of this study is to investigate whether Ccl25 and its
receptor Ccr9 are expressed during embryo implantation in mice.
Methodology: Ccl25 and Ccr9 transcript abundance was measured by
quantitative Real-Time PCR and normalized to YWHAZ expression in
blastocysts ﬂushed from uterine horns at gestation days (gd) 3.5, 4.5 and
5.5 (n¼30).
Preliminary results: Expression of both chemokine and receptor was not
detected in the pre-implantation blastocyst on gd3.5. Expression of Ccl25
mRNA increased after the onset of implantation on gd4.5 and 5.5, being
maximal on gd4.5 followed by a corresponding increase in Ccr9 on gd4.5
(p<0.05, Mann-Whitney test).
Discussion: The expression of Ccl25 and its receptor during the adhesion,
attachment and initial process of invasion of the blastocyst into the uterine
epithelium suggests an autocrine role for this chemokine during mouse
implantation and adds a new putative element to our understanding of
trophoblast-endometrium interactions.
Financial support: FAPESP, CNPq and CAPES
Keywords: Embryo Implantation, Blastocyst, Chemokine, Real-Time PCR
Early Career Researcher Plenary (ECR1 - ECR2)
[ECR1]
A STRATEGY FOR INVESTIGATING HEMOCHORIAL PLACENTATION
Michael J. Soares*, University of Kansas Medical Center, United States
Hemochorial placentation is a strategy involving modiﬁcation of the
maternal-foetal interface for the purpose of facilitating nutrient and
waste exchange and ensuring development of healthy offspring. Building
a hemochorial placenta is a complicated process involving the expansion
and lineage-speciﬁc differentiation of trophoblast stem cell populations.
Developmental fates emerge under the direction of an intrinsic genetic
program and the modulatory effects of the maternal environment.
Modern biomedical research has beneﬁtted from the use of accessible
model organisms (especially rodents) to study fundamental physiological
and pathological processes. The implementation of such a research
strategy has not been the norm for gaining insights into hemochorial
placentation. The purpose of this presentation is to extol the merits of the
rat as a model system for studying hemochorial placentation. There are
striking conserved elements in rat and human hemochorial placentation.
Among the shared features is a robust intrauterine trophoblast invasion,
which contributes to uterine spiral arteriole remodelling. There is also
a wealth of experimental tools that can facilitate dissection of rat
placentation phenotypes. These strategies can be complemented with
techniques for manipulating the rat genome and the generation of
mutant animal models with gene-speciﬁc perturbations. The availability
of in vitro rat trophoblast stem cell models and methods for trophoblastspeciﬁc gene manipulation make the rat an attractive model organism. In
summary, the rat possesses the requisite structural features and breadth
of research strategies to provide important mechanistic insights
regarding the regulation of hemochorial placentation. (Supported by NIH
HD20676)

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.16

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[ECR2]
DIFFERENTIATION POTENTIAL AND PARACRINE ACTIONS OF AMNIOTIC
MEMBRANE-DERIVED CELLS: IN VITRO AND IN VIVO STUDIES
M Margatti, A Cargnoni, D Rossi, L Ressel, Ornella Parolini*, Centro Ricerca
E.Menni, Italy
In seeking novel stem cell sources for application in regenerative medicine,
the amniotic membrane of human term placenta has attracted increasing
interest in recent years due to its early embryological origin and essential
role in fetomaternal tolerance, suggesting that it could harbour cells with
differentiation capacity and immunomodulatory features that would make
them applicable for cell therapy. The amniotic membrane in toto has long
been applied for treatment of wounds, burns and various ocular surface
disorders, conferring beneﬁcial effects including wound healing, enhanced
epithelialization, increased neovascularization, suppression of inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis. Recent studies have investigated the properties of the
two main cell populations which can be isolated from amniotic membrane,
namely, human amniotic epithelial cells (hAEC) and human amniotic
mesenchymal stromal cells (hAMSC). In particular, hAEC express several
markers of embryonic stem cells, and differentiate in vitro toward cell
types of all three germ layers. Meanwhile, hAMSC, which display phenotypic and functional characteristics reminiscent of mesenchymal stromal
cells of other sources including bone marrow and adipose tissue, have
been shown to differentiate toward mesodermal lineages, indication of
ectodermal and endodermal differentiation has also been reported.
Interestingly, these cells also display immunomodulatory effects, both
through suppression of T cell proliferation, as well as blocking of monocyte
maturation into dendritic cells. In vivo, we have demonstrated that fetal
membrane-derived cells have anti-ﬁbrotic and anti-inﬂammatory effects
in a mouse model of bleomycin-induced pulmonary ﬁbrosis, while in rat
models of cardiac injury and biliary ﬁbrosis, we observed that application
of amniotic membrane patches reduced post-ischemic injury, and inhibited ﬁbrosis progression, respectively. While the exact mechanisms (ie.
differentiation vs. paracrine actions) underlying the observed beneﬁcial
effects of amniotic membrane or its derived cells remain to be deﬁned, the
promising data obtained to date constitute strong evidence supporting
their future application in regenerative medicine.

Trophoblast Research Award (TR1)
[TR1]
UTERINE-SPECIFIC NODAL DELETION DISRUPTS PLACENTATION AND
CONTRIBUTES TO PRE-TERM BIRTH IN MICE
C. B. Park*, D. Dufort, McGill University, Canada
Introduction: Pre-term birth (PTB) is the leading cause of perinatal
mortality, accounting for over 75% of perinatal death. Despite recent
progress, PTB has continued to rise over the years and remains an
important clinical dilemma worldwide. Failure to decrease the rates of PTB
is attributed, in part, to our lack of understanding of the causes and
mechanisms that underlie pre-term delivery. In order to aid in the ongoing
pursuit of elucidating these mechanisms, our laboratory has been characterizing the expression of the TGF-b superfamily member, Nodal, in the
uterus and investigating the potential role this factor may play in facilitating the birth of healthy offspring.
Methods: Utilizing the loxP-Cre recombinase system, we have generated
a conditional knockout of Nodal in the female reproductive tract of adult
mice (Progesterone Receptor-Cre), bypassing embryonic lethality.
Results: Interestingly, the Nodal deﬁcient mice exhibit various reproductive abnormalities, including reduced rates of establishing pregnancy,
intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and pre-term delivery late into
development (d17.5). The placenta of the Nodal conditional knockout
mothers exhibits signiﬁcant disruption of the maternal basal plate by
d12.5 and, coincidentally, resembles the morphology of a late-stage
placenta. Furthermore, apoptosis is dysregulated at the maternal-fetal
interface. We hypothesize that deleting uterine Nodal affects placentation
and disrupts the endocrinological framework that underlies labour
thereby inducing premature delivery in our mouse model.
Discussion: We report here, a detailed phenotypic characterization of
a uterine Nodal knockout strain, implicating the Nodal signalling pathway
in facilitating healthy pregnancy. Our observations indicate that Nodal
ligand from a maternal source may play a crucial role in decidualization
and proper placenta development and its absence leads to IUGR and PTB.
Understanding the mechanisms that underlie IUGR and pre-term delivery
are paramount in the ultimate goal of eliminating complications during
pregnancy leading to pre-eclampsia, PTB and embryonic loss.
Keywords: Nodal Signalling Pathway, Pre-Term Birth, Intrauterine Growth
Restriction

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.17

SLIMP Award Lecture (SLIMP1)

Than Award Lecture (THAN1)

[SLIMP1]
EXPRESSION OF LEPTIN, A KEY PLACENTAL HORMONE

[THAN1]
TRANSFORMATION OF THE SPIRAL ARTERIES IN HUMAN PREGNANCY:
KEY EVENTS IN THE REMODELLING TIMELINE

J.L. Maymó*1, A. Pérez Pérez2, J.L. Dueñas3, J.C. Calvo1,4, V. SánchezMargalet2, C.L. Varone1, 1Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina,
2
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Sevilla, Spain, 3Servicio de Ginecología y Obstetricia, Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Spain,
4
Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental, Argentina
The process of embryo implantation and trophoblast invasion is currently
considered as the most limiting factor for the establishment of pregnancy.
Leptin has been proposed to play a relevant role in the regulation of the
embryo implantation as well as its maintenance. Leptin is a 16000 MW
protein product of the obese gene, originally considered as an adipocytederived signaling molecule for the central control of metabolism. However,
leptin has been suggested to be involved in other functions during pregnancy, particularly in placenta, where it was found to be expressed. In our
work we aimed to study the signal transduction pathways activated by
leptin in placenta and to elucidate the mechanisms that mediate the
antiapoptotic effect of leptin. Moreover, we attempted to study the regulation of leptin expression in placenta. BeWo and JEG-3 choriocarcinoma
cell line, as well as trophoblastic cells from human placenta explants were
used. Western blot analyses were carried out to detect leptin expression as
well as the phosphorylated form of proteins involved in mayor signaling
pathways. Apoptosis was assayed by ﬂow cytometry and by western blot of
caspase-3 fragmentation. Transient transfection assays with a plasmid
construction containing different leptin promoter regions and the reporter
gene luciferase, and expression vectors for some intermediates of signaling
pathways were used to determine the transcriptional regulation of leptin.
qRT-PCR was performed to determine leptin mRNA expression. We have
found that leptin stimulates JAK-STAT, MAPK and PI3K pathways in
placental cells and in human placental explants. The effect of leptin on JEG3 survival was completely reversed by blocking p42/44 MAPK activation
employing the MEK inhibitor PD98059. We have also found that hCG
added to BeWo and JEG-3 cells showed a stimulatory effect on leptin
expression. Moreover, hCG treatment enhanced leptin promoter activity
and mRNA expression .Similar results were obtained with placental
explants evidencing physiological relevance. We found that dbcAMP
counteracted hCG effect on leptin expression. Moreover, hCG effect on
leptin is mediated by the MAPK pathway. We showed that cAMP stimulates leptin expression in placental cells. More interestingly, we demonstrated that the cAMP effect on leptin expression probably involves both
the PKA classic signaling pathway and the MAPK signal transduction
pathway. A cross talk between these pathways would be responsible for
the observed effects.
In summary, our results further support the importance of leptin in the
biology of reproduction

L Harris*, The University of Manchester, United Kingdom
During human pregnancy, the uterine spiral arteries are progressively
remodelled to form dilated conduits lacking maternal vasomotor control.
This phenomenon ensures that a constant supply of blood is delivered to the
materno-fetal interface at an optimal velocity for nutrient exchange.
Impaired vascular transformation is associated with poor pregnancy
outcome and an increased risk of pre-eclampsia, fetal growth restriction and
second trimester miscarriage. Conversion of a tonic maternal arteriole
composed of multiple layers of vascular smooth muscle, elastin and
numerous other extracellular matrix components, into a highly dilated yet
durable vessel, requires tight regulatory control and the coordinated actions
of multiple cell types. Initial disruption of the vascular wall, characterised by
foci of endothelial cell loss, and separation and misalignment of vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMC), is coincident with an inﬂux of uterine natural
killer (uNK) cells and macrophages. uNK cells are a source of angiogenic
growth factors and matrix degrading proteases, thus they possess the
capacity to initiate changes in VSMC phenotype and instigate extracellular
matrix catabolism. However, complete vascular cell loss, mediated in part by
apoptosis and dedifferentiation, is only achieved following colonisation of
the arteries by extravillous trophoblast (EVT). EVT produce a variety of chemokines, apoptotic cytokines and matrix degrading proteases, enabling them
to inﬂuence the fate of other cells within the placental bed and complete the
remodelling process. The complex interplay of cell-cell and cell-matrix
interactions required for effective vascular transformation will be discussed.
Poster session 1 (P1.1 - P1.83)
[P1.1]
DEPORTATION OF SYNCYTIAL SPROUTS IN NORMAL TERM PLACENTAS
GJ Burton*, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
Introduction. Trophoblast is deported from the placenta into the maternal
blood throughout pregnancy. In early pregnancy this involves the detachment of syncytial sprouts containing euchromatic nuclei. At term, it has
been suggested that deportation involves the extrusion of syncytial knots
containing nuclei with heavily condensed chromatin, interpreted by some
as apoptotic. Syncytial sprouts are still present at term, and it was recently
suggested that these may continue to be deported [1]. This conclusion was
rightly criticised because of the danger of sectioning artefacts [2].
Materials. Parafﬁn-embedded blocks were selected at random from 5
normal term placentas ﬁxed by immersion in formalin immediately after
delivery before the tissue samples were excised, entrapping the contents
of the intervillous space. 40 serial 7 mm sections were cut for each placenta,
scanned and the images examined.
Results. Many sprouts with euchromatic nuclei were identiﬁed arising
from the villous surface in each placenta. Examples of apparently detached
sprouts were also observed in individual sections. The majority proved to
be attached to the villi when followed through serial sections. However, in
each placenta examples were found where sprouts were genuinely
detached, and had no connection to a villus.
Conclusion. This study provides conclusive proof that syncytial sprouts,
containing euchromatic nuclei, are deported into the maternal blood in
late pregnancy. The incidence of these sprouts is increased in preeclampsia [3], and so they may contribute to the overall increase in
trophoblast deportation observed in these pregnancies.
[1] Burton GJ , Jones CJ. Syncytial knots, sprouts, apoptosis, and trophoblast
deportation from the human placenta. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol 2009;48:28-37.
[2] Huppertz B. IFPA Award in Placentology Lecture: Biology of the
placental syncytiotrophoblast–myths and facts. Placenta 31 Suppl:S75-81.
[3] Alvarez H, Benedetti WL, De Leonis VK. Syncytial proliferation in
normal and toxemic pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1967;29:637-43.
Keywords: Syncytial sprouts, Trophoblast, Deportation

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.18

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.2]
A NEW POSSIBLE FUNCTION FOR PLACENTAL PERICYTES
CJP Jones1, G Desoye*,2, 1University of Manchester, United Kingdom,
2
Medical University of Graz, Austria
Introduction: The pericyte is a multifunctional cell closely associated with
endothelial cells and may play a role in angiogenesis and vessel stabilisation. In this study, archival material from an investigation into ultrastructural changes in placental development and pathology has been
examined to identify previously undescribed structures associated with
the pericyte of the human placental terminal villus.
Methods: Placentae were collected between 1973 and 1976 from St Mary's
Hospital, Manchester; they were obtained immediately after delivery and
processed for electron microscopy. Electron micrographs from 100 specimens (normal term: 14, postmature: 21, diabetes: 14, intrauterine growth
restriction: 11, rhesus incompatibility: 12, preeclampsia: 28) were examined for this study.
Results: Structures in the form of outgrowths from the main body of the
pericyte were found. These generally had a narrow neck rich in cytoplasmic ﬁlaments and terminated in swollen tips which appeared to bleb
off the pericyte and form electron lucent stromal vesicles. These vesicles
were distributed through the connective tissue stroma of the chorionic
villus, sometimes making contact with the trophoblast basal lamina and
stromal cell processes. Such features were occasionally found in placentae
from normal term pregnancies but were increasingly identiﬁed where
capillaries showed abnormalities such as contraction and thickening of the
endothelial cells and a failure to form sinusoids, as in pregnancies
complicated by diabetes, postmaturity, rhesus incompatibility and
preeclampsia. Changes associated with apoptosis were not generally
associated with the cells bearing outgrowths.
Conclusion: It is suggested that such outgrowths and associated blebs or
stromal vesicles may contribute to ﬂuid homeostasis where normal
mechanisms are impaired by thickened or damaged endothelial cells.

[P1.3]
THE CHARACTERIZATION OF FIBROCYTES: A NOVEL FIBROBLASTIC CELL
OF THE HUMAN PLACENTA
M.R. Riddell*1, B. Lowen2, S.T. Davidge1,3, L.J. Guilbert2, 1University of
Alberta, Department of Physiology, Canada, 2University of Alberta,
Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Canada, 3University of Alberta, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Canada
Introduction: The placenta is the site of oxygen, nutrient, and waste
exchange between the mother and fetus, and as such is primarily
a vascular organ. Microenvironmental conditions are known to be
important in the control of angiogenesis thus the placental stroma as well
as the trophoblastic shell likely regulate the expansion of the villous
vasculature. This study identiﬁes, for the ﬁrst time in the placenta, a population of ﬁbroblastic cells positive for monocyte/macrophage lineage
markers previously identiﬁed in adult circulation as ﬁbrocytes and
examines their role in placental angiogenesis.
Methods: Fibroblastic cells were isolated from human ﬁrst trimester, early
third trimester, and term placentas and expanded in culture. The cells were
stained with a panel of ﬁbroblastic and macrophage markers and were
assessed for the ability to phagocytose ﬂuorescent beads. The effect of
ﬁbrocytes on the formation of vascular tubes in Matrigel was assessed.
Results: A population of placental ﬁbroblastic cells positive for the
macrophage markers CD14 and CSF-1R, negative for myoﬁbroblast marker
alpha-smooth muscle actin and capable of phagocytosing ﬂuorescent
beads were deﬁned as ﬁbrocytes. The cells could be isolated by CD45 (a
hematopoietic marker) ﬂow cytometry (along with Hofbauer cells) but
became CD45 negative in two weeks of culture although CD14 and CSF-1R
expression were maintained. Vascular tube formation in Matrigel of
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECS) was disrupted in a 48 hr
co-culture with CD45 negative ﬁbrocytes. Staining of early third trimester
and term placental villous sections revealed a large pool of spindle shaped
cells dispersed throughout the villi positive for CSF-1R and CD14 with
a smaller number being positive for CD45.
Conclusions: Due to their abundance and localization in the villi and their
ability to disrupt tubule formation in Matrigel we propose that ﬁbrocytes
may have important roles in the regulation of placental angiogenesis.
Keywords: Angiogenesis, Fibrocyte, Fibroblast

ĂFigure 1. Pericytes showing outgrowths with narrow necks (arrows) terminating in
swollen tips. A large stromal vesicle (*) can be seen.

Keywords: Placenta, pericyte, ultrastructure, capillary

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.4]
TWIN PREGNANCY: A MODEL OF PLACENTAL ADAPTATION
Ettore Piccoli, Velentina Borgarello, Alessandro Rolfo, Carlotta Bossotti,
Anna Maria Nuzzo, Tullia Todros*, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Turin, Italy
Introduction: The U shaped curve of perinatal mortality rate, showing an
increase after 41 weeks of gestational age, is shifted to the left in twin
pregnancies, where the increase occurs at 37-38 weeks This might be due
to the fact that placental changes occur earlier compared to those of single
pregnancies. The aim of this study was to compare villous patterns of twin
and single placentae at 34-37 weeks by morphometric analisys.
Methods: We examined the placentas from two dichorionic diamniotic
uneventful twin pregnacies with normal fetal growth and two agematched single pregnancies with normal fetal growth. Twin and single
placentae were ﬁxed in neutral buffered 4% formaldehyde solution and
weighed. Three vertical full-thickness slices (one central, one intermediate
and one peripheral) including chorionic and basal plates were excised.
Infarctuated areas were excluded. Three villous sections for each placenta
were examined to determine structural morphometrical composition
(percentage of ﬁbrinoid, intervillous space, and villous tissue) and relative
amount of villous type (stem, mature intermediate, and terminal villi).
Results: Twin placentas are characterized by a higher percentage of
terminal villi (42.77%) compared to age-matched single placentae
(33.89%).. No differences were observed in intermediate villi pattern
between twin (30.4%) and single (36.6%) placentae.
Discussion: Our results suggest that maternal haemodinamic changes
occurring during multiple pregnancies can't supply to the requirements of
two fetuses starting at 35-36 weeks thus inducing an increase in terminal
villi in twin dichorionic placentae as previously described in single pregnancies with feto-placental hypoxia.
Keywords: Placenta, Twin pregnancy, Morphometry, Villous morphology

A.19

[P1.5]
PATTERN OF THIRD TRIMESTER PLACENTAL POSITION IN AN AFRICAN
POPULATION
GI Ogbole*1, OA Dosumu2, OS Bassey2, 1University of Ibadan, Ibadan,
Nigeria, 2University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria
Background: Placenta is an apposition or fusion of the foetal membranes to
the uterine mucosa for physiological exchange. This fusion occurs at the
embryonic pole where the foetal chorionic tissue fuses with the maternal
decidual tissues. Once the fusion has occurred the placenta thereafter
becomes a functional unit at about 10weeks of gestation. As a result of
continuous growth of the uterus, the placenta continually migrates but attains
a deﬁnite position in the third trimester. Placental location is important in
patients that are to undergo caesarean section or amniocentesis. Clinicians
believe that the placenta is more likely to implant near an existing uterine scar
in a subsequent pregnancy. Placenta previa is also common in patients with
previous caesarean section, multiple gestation, anaemia or previous abortion.
Materials and Methods: Using ultrasound at the University College
Hospital Ibadan, three hundred and ninety one pregnant women in their
third trimester were prospectively evaluated after obtaining an informed
consent. Pregnant women whose placental site could not be easily identiﬁed were excluded. Scanning was performed using a transabdominal
approach with 3.5 MHz sector probe.
Results: The ages of patients range between 17 and 43 years with a mean of
30 years. Ten different placental positions were identiﬁed. primigravidas
represented only 29.7% .An anterior placental position had the highest
frequency with 37.1%. Fundal position represented 7.7% while both lateralright and left locations accounted for 7.9%. Low lying placenta or placenta
previa was found in 1.8% of patients. Placenta position showed no signiﬁcant
variation with parity, number of foetuses or previous caesarean section.
Conclusion: Third trimester placental position can be wide-ranging and
affected by pre-existing maternal conditions. For quality antenatal care,
ultrasound examination may be recommended in the third trimester for
assessment of placental location, as it has become readily available in
developing countries like Nigeria.
Keywords: placenta, ultrasound, pregnancy, position

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.20

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.6]
A SYSTEMATIC AND STANDARDIZED CLASSIFICATION OF PLACENTAL
PATHOLOGY A NORWEGIAN ENTERPRISE

[P1.7]
DIFFUSIONAL SCREENING OF CAPILLARIES WITHIN VILLI OF THE
HUMAN PLACENTA

B Roald*1, G Turowski1, K Collett2, R Laurini3, TA Hanssen3, C Vogt4 et al,
1
University of Oslo, Norway, 2University of Bergen, Norway, 3University of
Tromsø, Norway, 4NTNU, Trondheim, Norway, 5Helse Førde, Førde,
Norway, 6Helse Fonna, Haugesund, Norway

JS Gill*1, DS Grebenkov2, CM Salaﬁa3, D Vvedensky1, 1Imperial College,
United States, 2Ecole Polytechnique, France, 3Placental Analytics LLC,
United States

Introduction: A systematic, objective and standardized classiﬁcation of
placental pathology, useful to clinicians, has never been agreed upon. This
lack of a uniﬁed clinical-pathologic registration of placental structural
abnormalities hampers wider comparisons, clinical-pathologic research
and the understanding of the clinical relevance of the ﬁndings.
Methods: A group of eight Norwegian, experienced pathologists with
special interest in placental pathology has formed a national group,
meeting regularly, discussing current knowledge and new basic insight in
placental development and reaction to various type of injury. We additionally discuss these concepts in a wider network with Nordic and
European placental pathologists. Through systematized case discussions
and discussion of current relevant literature, we have agreed upon
a common, standardized, classiﬁcation scheme. All of us are currently
using this classiﬁcation scheme and are collecting information and feedback on the clinical usefulness of such a classiﬁcation.
Results: We have agreed upon a simple, clinically easy- to- understand,
standardized line of a main diagnosis, as stated below. In the standardized
main diagnosis, mature or immature is additionally added.
1. Normal placenta
2. Placenta with chorioamnionitis
3. Placenta with villitis (usually VUE)
4. Placenta with materno-placental circulatory disorder
5. Placenta with feto-placental circulatory disorder
6. Placenta with maturation disturbance
7. Placenta with ﬁndings suggestive of gene aberration
8. Placenta with placentation defect
9. Placenta with other pathology
All diagnoses include a comment with additional speciﬁcation of the
ﬁndings and discussion of the clinical relevance etc.
Discussion: The feedback from clinical colleagues is so far very positive.
The classiﬁcation is easy to use by pathologists, and relate to deﬁned
criteria from well documented research. The criteria and practical use of
the classiﬁcation will be discussed.
Keywords: Placental pathology, Classiﬁcation scheme, clinical-pathologic
research

Goal/Background: Respiratory transfer across the placenta to the fetus
occurs by (i) maternal blood bathing the chorionic villi in oxygen, (ii)
oxygen permeating the villus surface and diffusing into the fetal capillaries, and (iii) oxygen transport to the fetus by fetal blood. The diffusive
current in (ii) is inﬂuenced by factors such as the number and spatial
arrangement of the capillaries within the villi. This can lead to diffusional
screening of inner by outer capillaries, which reduces oxygen transport to
the fetus by the screened capillaries.
Materials/Methods: Step (ii) is modelled as stationary oxygen diffusion
within the villi. The oxygen concentration at the villus boundary is taken as
a constant and the ﬂux into the capillaries is described by a Robin
boundary condition. The boundaries of the villi and capillaries are
obtained from digitized images that are representative of placentas with
no abnormalities and those with pre-existing and pregnancy-induced
hypertension (PIH).
Results: Panels (a), (b), and (c) show villi with one, two, and nine capillaries. The error made in calculating the total capillary ﬂux as the sum of
independent ﬂuxes for each capillary (with the same circular area) is 0.6%
for (a), 11% for (b), and 64% for (c). The increasing error is due to diffusional
screening, i.e. the competition between adjacent capillaries for diffusing
oxygen. Panel (d) shows how the number of capillaries within individual
villi affects the ﬂux per capillary area through diffusional screening. Clinical implications of these results can be seen in the table, which shows that
placentas with pre-existing hypertension have larger villi, more capillaries,
but a lower average ﬂux per capillary area per villus than the other
placentas.
Conclusions: Diffusional screening has been shown to be a strong function
of capillary number within villi and its correlation with pre-existing
hypertension has been suggested.

Ă

Ă

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.21

[P1.8]
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF CAPILLARIES WITHIN VILLI OF THE HUMAN
PLACENTA: AREA, FLUX, AND BIRTH WEIGHT, PLACENTAL WEIGHT AND
GESTATIONAL AGE
JS Gill*1, D Grebenkov2, CM Salaﬁa3, DP Misra4, D Vvedensky1, 1Imperial
College, United States, 2Ecole Polytechnique, France, 3Placental Analytics
LLC, United States, 4Wayne State University, United States
Ă

ĂKeywords: villous capillary, oxygen ﬂux, diffusion screening, placental

function

Goal/Background: We have, through image analysis and solution of
diffusion equations, obtained oxygen ﬂux data for individual villi. Oxygen
ﬂux is crucial for fetal viability, and can be considered proportional to
nutrient exchange. Our goal is to determine if our measures account for
birth weight variance that is not explained by gestational age or placental
weight. This would provide additional insights into aspects of placental
function key to fetal growth and health
Materials/Methods: 13 placentas were selected from a consecutive birth
cohort that has been extensively studied for chorionic surface shape, cord
insertion and chorionic vasculature. From these, a minimum of 7 photomicrographs were taken from routine stained placental samples. Images
were obtained from the central zone of non-marginal samples and were
selected for those in which blood retention made the capillaries visible.
The villous perimeters and each capillary were manually traced by a single
observer (CMS). The stationary oxygen concentration within each villus is
the solution of Laplace's equation, with a ﬁxed value at the villous surface
and a Robin boundary condition at the capillary boundary.
Results: A total of 3855 capillaries were measured; the number varied
from 57 to 863 capillaries per case. Birth weights ranged from 2261-4585g
(3086+612 g), gestational ages from 258-290 days (277+7 days), and
placental weights from 240-740 g (413+97g). Mean capillary areas,
perimeter, oxygen ﬂux and the ﬂux/area ratio were 759+888, 87+53, 55.9
+36.1 and 0.11+0.063, respectively. Ordering the cases by increasing birth
weight, ﬂux and ﬂux area tended to decrease (Figure 1). However, after
adjustment for gestational age and placental weight, ﬂux and ﬂux/area
tended to increase with the residual birth weight (Figure 2).
Conclusions: Individual capillary oxygen ﬂux and ﬂux per area account for
birth weight independent of gestational age and placental weight.

Ă

ĂKeywords: Morphology, villous capillary, oxygen ﬂux, birth weight

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.22

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.9]
STATISTICAL TOPOLOGY OF PLACENTAL VASCULATURE
R-K Seong1, CM Salaﬁa*2, D Vvedensky1, 1Imperial College, United Kingdom,
2
Placental Analytics LLC, United States
Goal/Background: The vascular system of the placenta emanates from two
arteries and one vein that extend from the fetus to the placenta through
the umbilical cord. The veins and arteries branch from their insertion in
the placenta, ﬁrst within the chorion in a tree-like manner and then, upon
leaving the chorion, diving into the placenta with further branching. The
goal of this project is to develop a quantitative measure of the branching of
the placenta that distinguishes between normal and abnormal placentas.
Materials/Methods: We characterize the placental vascular network by
its edges and vertices. Each edge connects an nth generation vertex to and
(n+1)st generation vertex, with the origin designated as the ﬁrst generation vertex. The network is then represented by triangles that connect an
nth generation vertex to two (n+1)st generation vertices. A partition
function is constructed for this triangulated network that weighs the
triangular elements according to their generation and area from which
area characteristics associated with different generations are determined.
Results: Panel (a) shows the areas of a high birth-weight (HBW), a low
birth-weight (LBW) and a normal placenta with increasing generations
(decreasing b). Panel (b) shows the corresponding distribution of the areas
among the generations. The entropy indicates that in the early generations
(large b), there is a much small disparity of triangulated areas in the
normal placenta, even though the total areas are comparable. The triangulated increases with generations more rapidly for the nor-mal placenta,
but with a distribution that approaches the other two placentas. The ﬁnal
states for all three types of placenta are similar.
Conclusions: Our analysis provides a way of distinguishing normal from
abnormal placentas solely from the topology of their vasculature. Further
work will determine the sensitivity of our methodology to other types of
abnormalities.

[P1.10]
INFLUENCE OF PROTEIN S & PROTEIN C ON PLACENTA VILLOUS STRUCTURE A STEREOLOGICAL STUDY
A. O'Malley1, D.S. Gibbons1, J. Donnelly1, S. Cooley1, M. Geary1, J.E. Gillan*1,2
et al, 1Rotunda Hospital, Ireland, 2Trinity College, Ireland, 3Our Lady's
Hospital for Sick Children, Ireland
Introduction: Protein S (PS) and Protein C (PC) deﬁciency are claimed to
cause impairment of maternal blood ﬂow to the placenta. This study
evaluated the effect of these thrombophilias on placental terminal villous
structure using stereological measurement.
Methods: Clinical cohorts were obtained from low risk primigravid
mothers of 36-41 weeks gestation.. These cohorts comprised 5 cases each
with (i) PS levels <20%; (ii) PS levels 20-25%; (iii) PC levels <70% of normal
values. 8 placentas from mothers with preeclampsia associated with IUGR
(PET-IUGR) and 8 normal cases provided positive and negative controls
respectively. The volume of each placental disc was measured followed by
uniform random sampling of 10 full thickness biopsies. 5 ﬁelds were
examined from coded haematoxylin and eosin stained sections. Stereological assessment comprised star volume and surface area measurements
of terminal villi (TV) and of their capillaries. Two-dimension enumeration
of syncytial knots was also performed in each case.
Results: There was a statistically signiﬁcant reduction in the volume
fraction of capillaries (PS<20 p¼0.043; PS 20-25 p¼0.005; PC p¼0.002) and
of terminal villi (PS<20 p¼0.05; PS 20-25 p¼0.13; PC p¼0.005) in the
thrombophilia groups when compared with control values. The levels
were commensurate with those noted in the PET-IUGR cohort (capillaries:
p¼0.002; TV: p¼0.03). In addition the surface area of capillaries were
reduced in the thrombophilia groups (PS<20 p¼0.01; PS 20-25 p¼0.005;
PC p¼0.0002) when compared with control values. This was similar to that
found in PET-IUGR (p¼0.002). The surface area of terminal villi was
reduced in all 3 cohorts similar to PET-IUGR, but was only statistically
signiﬁcant (p¼0.017) with protein C. Syncytial knots were not increased
when compared with controls.
Conclusions: These ﬁndings demonstrate that PC and PS affect placental
villi in a way which is similar to PET-IUGR. In addition, the alterations
evident in the intermediate PS cohort highlights a requirement for
heightened clinical concern in this group.
Keywords: Stereology, Thrombophilia, Protein S, Protein C

Ă

ĂKeywords: Chorionic plate, chorionic vasculature, vascular structure,
branching angoiogenesis

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.23

[P1.11]
SPATIAL ARRANGEMENT OF PERIPHERAL PLACENTAL VILLI AND
VILLOUS CAPILLARIES IN TYPE 1 DIABETES

[P1.12]
ABNORMALITY OF THE PLACENTAL VASCULATURE AFFECTS PLACENTAL
THICKNESS

M. Jirkovská*, J. Kaláb, M. Jadrnícek, V. Niedobová, M. Moravcová, V. Krejcí,
Charles University in Prague, First Faculty of Medicine, Czech Republic

O Shlakhter1, M Yampolsky1, CM Salaﬁa*2, DH Mandel2, 1University of
Toronto, Canada, 2Placental Analytics LLC, United States

Objectives: Maternal diabetes manifests itself by the great variability of
placental villous vascularity. As shown previously, the capillary bed of
terminal villi is more branched in placentas from pregnancies complicated
by gestational diabetes. This contribution deals with the spatial organization of villous capillaries in placentas from Type 1 diabetes (DM1).
Methods: Specimens collected by the systematic random sampling from
14 normal and 16 DM1 placentas were ﬁxed in formalin with admixture of
eosin, and embedded in parafﬁn. In sections cut at 120 mm, the topology of
capillaries in terminal villi was analyzed by the confocal laser scanning
microscope, and the frequency of variable types of capillary bed was
analyzed. Based on the stacks of optical sections, villous capillaries and
mutual relationships of villi in the intervillous space were visualized.
Results: Two simplest types of villous capillary bed, i. e. U-like loop and Y
like branching were found in both studied groups. Some villi had capillary
segments interconnected with one or more “redundant” connections“
(RC), i.e. capillaries that can be removed without disconnecting the
capillary bed. The proportion of capillary beds without RCs was higher in
normal placentas (80%) than in DM1 placentas (67%) respectively whereas
the mean number of RCs per villus was higher in DM1 group (0.41) than in
control group (0.23). Diabetic placentas displayed two types of abnormal
villi: 1) large villi with few capillaries in edematous stroma, and 2) large
villi displaying chorangiosis. 3D reconstruction showed a markedly waved
capillaries of highly variable diameter in the latter type. The arrangement
of capillaries in such villi inﬂuenced their size and shape, which resulted in
changed shape and dimensions of adjoining parts of the intervillous space.
Discussion: In order to compensate the maternal metabolic disorder, the
DM1 placenta manifests more intense angiogenesis resulting in both the
more dense villous capillary bed and abnormalities of its spatial arrangement. The consequent changes of the villous shape and size may locally
inﬂuence the haemodynamics in the intervillous space.
Keywords: capillary bed, Type 1 diabetes, spatial arrangement,
angogenesis

Background. Our empirical modeling suggests that deformation of
placental vascular growth is associated with an abnormal placental surface
shapeand lowered placental functional efﬁciency. We hypothesize that
placentas with deformed vascular trees have irregular vascular branching
and both increased variabilityof placental thickness and lower mean
thickness.
Materials and Methods. Fourier analysis quantiﬁed placental shape variability, including non-central umbilical cord insertion, and regularly
irregular shapes. To quantify the thickness, from a cross-section of the
placenta along an oriented diameter is measured mean placental thickness
and thickness variation. The functional efﬁciency is quantiﬁed as the
scaling exponent b¼log (Placental Weight)/log(Birth Weight). The normal
value of the scaling exponent is bz0.75, reﬂecting the fractality of the
vasculature. Higher b corresponds to lower functional efﬁciency.
Results. Non-centrality of the placement of the umbilical cord is strongly
signiﬁcantly correlated with thickness of the placenta, consistent with our
earlier ﬁndings (Spearman's r¼0.128, p¼0.002). Placentas with deformed
shape are strongly signiﬁcantly associated with lower overall thickness
and higher variability of thickness. r lies between -0.173 and -0.254
(p<0.001) for correlations of Fourier coefﬁcients quantifying shape
deformations with normalized mean thickness. Finally, both lower mean
thickness and high variability of thickness are strongly positively correlated with b (reduced placental efﬁciency).
Conclusions. Our ﬁndings conﬁrm the predictions of our empirical
modeling. A regularly deformed placental surface is associated with nonuniform placental thickness, and lower average thickness. We speculate
that lower thickness is caused by sparse vascular coverage due to an
abnormal placental vascular growth. As a conﬁrmation of this, placentas
with lower average thickness are less functionally efﬁcient.

ĂKeywords: Villous arborization, umbilical cord insertion, chorionic disk
shape, chorionic vasculature

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.24

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.13]
ADVANCED PARENTAL AGES AND PLACENTAL THICKNESS ASSOCIATED
WITH IQ AT AGE 7 YEARS

[P1.14]
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF PLACENTAS OF SHEEP PRODUCED BY
INTRACYTOPLASMIC SPERM INJECTION (ICSI)

CM Salaﬁa*1,2, DP Misra3, AK Charles4, RK Miller5, 1Placental Analytics LLC,
United States, 2Institute for Basic Research, United States, 3Wayne State
University, United States, 4Princess Margaret Hospital, Australia, 5University of Rochester, United States

I La Rosa*1, F Pereyra Bonnet1,2, R Fernandez-Martín1, A Gibbons2,
D. F. Salamone1, 1Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Agriculture Faculty,
University of Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Bariloche Experimental Station,
National Institute of Agriculture Technology of Argentina (INTA), Argentina

Background: We hypothesized that placental disk thickness reﬂects
branching growth of viscera including neuronal dendritic trees, and thus
be associated with variation in childhood IQ.
Methods: IQ at age 7 was assessed using the Wechsler Intelligence Scale.
Paternal and maternal ages were centered to minimize collinearity.
Parental ages, placental weight (grams), and placental thickness (mm)
were used as the independent variables in regression analyses of age 7 year
IQ in 12,926 singleton liveborns delivered 34-42 weeks with complete
placental data. Analyses were stratiﬁed on gender and race with covariates
of socioeconomic status, parity, and gestational age.
Results: All models were adjusted for age at IQ testing. After adjustment
for SES, parity, and gestational age, parental ages and placental measurements independently predicted IQ at age 7 years but results varied by
gender-race subgroups. Older paternal age was associated with a statistically signiﬁcant reduction in IQ in all subgroups except Black boys. Older
maternal age was associated with an increase in IQ in all four subgroups
with effects about two times larger in girls than in boys, regardless of race.
Placental thickness was positively associated with higher IQ for White boys
and White girls but not Black boys or Black girls. Tests for interactions of
gender, race, and paternal age detected statistically signiﬁcant interactions
between gender and paternal age, race and paternal age, and gender and
race together with paternal age (3way) on IQ. There is also a signiﬁcant
interaction between race and thickness on IQ.
Conclusion: Placental thickness is correlated with age 7 yr IQ but the
ﬁndings vary by race and gender. Further exploration of the possible
interaction of these factors on the arborization reﬂected by placental
thickness that correlates with age 7 yr IQ is indicated.

New reproductive technologies in farm animals, like cloning, are usually
associated with placental abnormalities after transferences to recipients;
i.e. Large Offspring Syndrome, polyhydramnios, hydroallantois, larger
placentomas, reduced vascularization, extended gestations, dystocia, etc.
So, it is of great interest to analyze placenta gross morphology as a measure
of how the maternal- fetal physiology is affected by the ICSI. The length of
in vitro embryo culture is also an important factor affecting the placentation. We have performed ICSI followed by chemical activation in ovine.
Embryos were transferred at day 2 of in vitro culture to contralateral
oviducts (treatment 1, T1) or at day 7 to ipsilateral utherine horn (Treatment 2, T2) of synchronized merino ewes. A total of 228 T1 and 46 T2
resulted in two pregnancies (one of each treatment). Parturitions occurred
at term by normal delivery. Born lambs were healthy. ICSI placentas
showed no signals of tissue degeneration or excess of ﬂuid or blood. Total
weight, cotyledon number and weight and cotyledons/total weight were
registered. Placenta 1 weighted 396 g (30% cotyledonary) and contained 83
cotyledons with a mean weight of 1.43 g ( 0.8). Placenta 2 weighted 365.7
g (21% cotyledonary) and contained 72 cotyledons with a mean weight of
1.06g ( 0.77). In placenta 2, we observed a lower percentage of cotiledonary tissue and a lower number of cotyledons than in placenta 1. In T2,
Individual weights of cotyledons were statistically lower compared to T1
(t-test). These differences could be attributed to longer in vitro culture
before embryo transfer in T2. Our results indicate that there are not major
placental abnormalities in ICSI produced sheep. To our knowledge,
previous studies about ICSI ovine placentas have never been reported.
Keywords: Ovine, ICSI, in vitro produced embryos, Cotyledons

IQ Effect (b, 95% conﬁdence interval)
Whites

Paternal age
(centered)
Maternal
age
(centered)
SES
Nulliparity
Gestational
age
Placental
weight
Thickness

Blacks

Boys

Girls

Boys

Girls

-0.133*
þ0.182*
þ6.26***
-1.91***
þ0.442***
-0.004
þ0.299***

-0.148**
þ0.399***
þ6.56***
-2.45***
þ0.478**
þ0.005
þ0.258***

-0.067
þ0.234**
þ3.15***
-2.88***
þ0.07
þ0.006
þ0.114

-0.155**
þ0.396***
þ4.16***
þ0.575
þ0.281*
þ0.01*
þ0.033

Placental
thickness
matters
in whites
as well
as black
boys
but not
black
girls.

All adjusted for chronological age at time of testing,
Footnote p-values for each cell *p<0.05 **p<0.01 ***p<0.001
Keywords: parental age, IQ, placental thickness, placental pathology

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.25

[P1.15]
VASCULAR CAST OF PLACENTA IN A MONOCHORIONIC PREGNANCY
WITH SELECTIVE IUGR FETUS

[P1.16]
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF RAT PLACENTA IN MATERNAL UNDERNUTRITION CONDITIONS

S Visentin*, V Macchi, A Porzionato, R De Caro, E Cosmi, University of
Padua, Italy

S San Martin*1,2, B Ponzio3, Z Fortes3, T Zorn3, A Moller1, D Martinez3 et al,
1
Universidad de Valparaiso, Chile, 2CREAS, Chile, 3University of Sao Paulo,
Brazil, 4Federal University of Sao Paulo, Brazil

Objective: Selective IUGR in monochorionic pregnancy is deﬁned as the
presence of a intrauterine growth restriction in a single fetus and the
incidence is 5-15%. The most important cause is the irregular subdivision
of the placenta and can coexist with a twin to twin transfusion syndrome.
The aim of this study was to describe the application of vascular cast
technique to the single placenta of a monochorionic twin pregnancy to
observe the characteristics of the site of umbilical cord insertion and the
possible one blood circulation system shared.
Method: A twin gestation was conceived naturally by a 29-year-old
healthy woman. A monochorionic biamniotic pregnancy was diagnosed at
10 weeks’ gestation by ultrasound scan and was followed every week for
up to 23 weeks of gestation when there was a diagnosis of selective IUGR
and marginal umbilical cord insertion. Vascular corrosion cast was
performed through injection of metachrilate resins in the placenta vessels
Result: The twins were delivered by caesarean section at 29 weeks of
gestation due to Doppler abnormalities of the smallest fetus. The cast model
of the monochorionic biamniotic placenta showed that the insertion of the
umbilical cords into the placenta was central for normal twin and marginal
for the selective IUGR twin. Moreover, the marginal cord insertion of the IUGR
twin rised to a monopoidal pattern in which the vessels were distributed
asymmetrically along both sides of the placenta's circumference.
Conclusion: Fetal growth in monochorionic twins is proportional to the
placental territory and arteriovenous anastomoses. Placenta vascular
anatomy demonstrated a shared blood circulatory system.
Keywords: monochorionic pregnancy, selective IUGR, plastination, cord
insertion

Introduction: During the fetal development, nutrient and hormonal
milieu is strongly inﬂuenced by the placenta. Experiments in several
species have shown that maternal nutrition can profoundly inﬂuence
placental growth. Studies of the effects of maternal malnutrition on
placental morphology have revealed some striking changes, related to
decrease of villous mass in the human and a signiﬁcant decrease in
glycogen concentration in the rat. However, it is not known whether
maternal malnutrition model promotes morphological changes in the
placenta during their development.
Objectives: To determine whether the maternal undernutrition promote
differences in the development and morphology of the rats placentas.
Material and Methods: The experimental (undernutrition) group was fed
50% of the ad libitum intake, determined by the amount of food consumed
by the control group from day 1 of pregnancy until parturition. Placentas
from control and restricted groups were collected on days 14, 17 and 20
postcoitum (dp). We used histological technique to identify the placental
regions and images was visualized and captured with a CX81 (Olympus)
microscope and digital camera.
Results: The placentas from undernutrition mother have disarranged in
the labyrinth region with a decrease area and minor presences of fetal
blood vessels. Different to placentas form control animals, placentas from
undernutrition mother show premature presences of glycogen rich cells in
the junctional zone with a minor develop of spongiotrophoblast cells. Also,
there are minor presences of giant trophoblast cells was observed.
Conclusion: The maternal undernutrition during the pregnancy is related
with several morphological changes in the rats placentas. The altered
morphology in the different regions of this organ could be related with
a minor nutrients exchanges and growth factor synthesis, all biological
process related with a normal function of the placenta.
Acknowledgment: Dipuv 07/2008; CI 05/2006 (Universidad de Valparaíso, Chile) and CONICYT (ACT-73), Chile.
Keywords: Undernutrition, Placenta, Rat

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.26

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.17]
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PLACENTA AT TERM IN SMALL FOR GESTATIONAL AGE NEWBORNS (SGA)

[P1.18]
PLACENTATION IN LAGOSTOMUS MAXIMUS
VISCACHA” (RODENTIA, CHINCHILLIDAE)

R Prieto*, M Rojas, Universidad de Chile, Chile

MA Flamini1, E Portiansky1, PO Favaron2, DS Martins3, CE Ambrosio3,
MA Miglino*2 et al, 1Faculty of Veterinary Science, La Plata University,
Argentina, 2Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, University
of Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Faculty of Animal Sciences and Food Engineering,
University of São Paulo, Brazil, 4Museum of Natural History, Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt University
Berlin, Germany

The aims of this study were (1) to identify the morphometric parameters
differences as the area of the villi, the area of the vessel, the number of
vessels of small for gestational age (SGA) in connection with placentas of
newborns adequate for gestational age (AGA), (2) to identify the differences in the distribution of the placental lactogene and IGF-1 receptor on
free-chorionic villi, between SGA and AGA placenta.
Methods. We used 25 placenta at term (37-42 weeks), 12 AGA, and 13 SGA
newborns. The samples were obtained from the Maternity Hospital
Hernán Henriquez Aravena of Temuco, Chile, and were ﬁxed in 10%
formalin. The histological techniques were H-E Alcian blue, Masson's Trichromic. For immunoperoxidase technique primary antibodies used were
anti placental lactogen (polyclonal, dilution 1:200, NCL-PLP, Novocastra) to
label cytoplasmic granules from the syncytial trophoblast and anti IGF-1
(dilution 1:200, NCL-GHR, Novocastra). The following parameters were
evaluated: cross section area, number of blood vessels and blood vessel
area.
Results. The areas of the villi, the area of the vessel and the number of
vessels of SGA showed signiﬁcant differences between the control group
AGA and the SGA group. The immunostaining for the IGF-1 receptor was
evidenced in some intermediate and stem chorionic villi. Placental lactogen immunostaining was observed as granules in the cytoplasm of the
syncytial trophoblast in both groups.
Conclusion. The intention of the score or placental factor proposed in this
study is to contribute to the assessment of the placental function, strongly
related with neonatal clinical care.

MAXIMUS

“PLAINS

Plains viscacha is a species with an ample distribution in Argentine. The
gestational period is 145 -166 days, with two offspring. As member of the
suborder Hystricognathi, showing a high potential as experimental model.
However, only physiological data related to placentation are available so
far, whereas the structural and developmental characteristics are
unknown. We herein provide details based on 6 placentae of free-living
animals and including stages from early pregnancy to term. Samples were
obtained from Estación de Cría de Animales Silvestres, Buenos Aires, the
necropsy was performed at Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, La Plata
University, ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde. The material was processed for
light microscopy in Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science,
University of Sao Paulo, sectioned (5mm) and stained with haematoxylin
and eosin. Macroscopically the placenta had a discoidal shape, attacked to
the uterus by a peduncle, similar to other South American hystricognath
rodents. The chorioallantoic placenta showed a typical lobulated structure
with central maternal vessels and labyrinth, surrounded by the trophospongium. The labyrinth was dually vascularized from maternal and fetal
capillaries, with trophoblast in between. The distinct subplacenta was
richly vascularized, organized in lamellae situated on fetal mesenchyme
and associated with layers of syncytial and cellular trophoblast. It was
attached to decidua which possessed giant cells with evident chromatin.
The parietal and visceral yolk sac were present. The inverted visceral yolk
sac is villous with abundant blood islands. In conclusion the viscacha
placenta is similar to other rodents from Suborder Hystricomorpha already
studied. Once again, the current survey indicated that major qualitative
aspects of placentation were independent of scale dimensions, even in
larger species such as the viscacha or capybara. The current ﬁndings
support the value of the guinea pig as a most promising animal model for
human pregnancies, even being a small animal.
Keywords: Lagostomus maximus, placentation, subplacenta, yolk sac

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.19]
DISTRIBUTION AND FORM OF ENDOTHELIOCHORIAL PLACENTAS
AC Enders*1, AM Carter2, 1University of California Davis, United States,
2
University of Southern Denmark, Denmark
Endotheliochorial placentas occur in orders from all four major clades.
Species with this type of placenta include the smallest (short tailed shrew)
and largest (elephant) land mammals. The endotheliochorial placenta as
a deﬁnitive form has an interhemal area consisting of maternal endothelium, interstitial lamina, trophoblast, individual or conjoint basal laminas,
and fetal endothelium. We commonly think of such placentas as having
hypertrophied maternal endothelium with abundant rough endoplasmic
reticulum (rER), and as having hemophagous regions. Considering the
group as a whole, the trophoblast may be syncytial or cellular, fenestrated
or nonfenestrated, and there may or may not be hemophagous regions.
Variations also appear in the extent of hypertrophy of the maternal
endothelium and in the abundance of rER in these cells. This combination
of traits and a few other features produce many morphological combinations. In addition to endotheliochorial as a deﬁnitive condition, a transitory
endotheliochorial condition may appear in the course of forming
a hemochorial placenta. In sciuromorph rodents and vespertilionid bats
the maternal endothelium is displaced by trophoblast, transforming an
endotheliodichorial placenta into a hemodichorial or monochorial
placenta. In some emballonurid bats the early endotheliochorial placenta
is two-layered, but the deﬁnitive placenta lacks an outer syncytial
trophoblast layer. In mollosid bats a well developed endotheliochorial
placenta is present for a short time even after a deﬁnitive hemochorial
placenta has developed in a different region. It is concluded that the
endotheliochorial placenta is more widespread and diversiﬁed than originally thought, with the variant with cellular trophoblast in particular
appearing in several recently studied species.
Keywords: endotheliochorial, trophoblast, hemophagous regions,
comparative

A.27

[P1.20]
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TROPHOSPONGIUM AND GIANT CELL
REGION IN THE PLACENTA OF NECROMYS LASIURUS (RODENTIA,
CRICETIDAE, SIGMODONTINAE)
PO Favaron*1, AM Carter2, AM Mess3, MF Oliveira4, CE Ambrosio5, MA
Miglino1, 1Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, University of
Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Cardiovascular and Renal Research,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 3Museum of Natural
History, Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the
Humboldt University Berlin, Germany, 4Department of Animal Science,
Universidade Federal Rural do Semi-Árido, Mossoró, Brazil, 5Faculty of
Animal Sciences and Food Engineering, University of São Paulo, Pirassununga, Brazil
After fertilization the trophoblast giant cells (TGC) are among the ﬁrst
deﬁnitive cell type to differentiate. The associated region, i.e. the trophospongium and giant cell region showed a great variety of cells. Herein we
provide details of this region, based on 5 placentae of Necromys lasiusus
obtained from a breeding group at the UFERSA, Mossoró, Brazil. Tissues
were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde or 2.5% glutaraldehyde and subjected
to standard histological processing, using H&E and PAS, immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin and PCNA 1:300, DBA-lectin (1mg/ml; Sigma).
Samples were processing by TEM. Trophospongium region mainly consisted of spongiotrophoblast and large numbers of TGC. Both syncytial and
cellular trophoblast was found. Partly, the trophoblast formed thin
syncytial layers associated with the maternal blood spaces. Moreover, TGC
were dispersed within the trophospongium, closely associated with the
maternal blood system. They had large nuclei, evident chromatin, and
showed positive reaction for cytokeratin. Immunostaining for PCNA likewise revealed high proliferation activity of TGC. Neither the spongiotrophoblast nor the TGC associated with the trophospongium showed
positive reactions to PAS. This distinguished them from another type of
cell, the so-called glycogen cells, the only type in this region that showed
positive reaction to PAS. PAS positive cells were present inside the
trophospongium as well as on its outer border, entering the decidual
region. Some of these cells were positive for DBA-lectin on decidua, suggesting being NK cells, which are involved to remodeling of implantation
sites. Therefore, we observed a continuous band of TGC, situated between
the decidua and trophospongium. This band was connected to an area of
accumulated TGC at placental border. Giant cells were mostly bi or
multinucleated in nature. The current ﬁndings conﬁrm that this region
consists of different subtypes of trophoblast cells and support the importance of this region for a normal development. Financial support: Fapesp.
Keywords:
Sigmodontinae,
placentation,
trophospongium,
immunostaining

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.28

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.21]
APOPTOSIS PERCENTAGE AND CALCIUM CONCENTRATION IN BOVINE
PLACENTOME
REG Rici1, SEA Will1, AP Antunes2, PO Favaron*1, AC Galdos1, DA Maria3 et al,
1
Department of Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Sao
Paulo, Brazil, 2Physics Institute, Federal University of Uberlandia, Brazil,
3
Butantan Institute, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
The mammalian placenta consists by an overlap of both fetal and maternal
tissues. The maintenance of tissue homeostasis in multicellular organisms
is ensured by different biological regulatory mechanisms, which include
cell proliferation and programmed cell death or apoptosis. Apoptotic
bodies formed during the cattle gestation are largely phagocytosed by
macrophages. This process occurs during pregnancy and, lastly, decreasing
the overlap of fetal tissue on maternal tissue during late gestation for
release the fetal membranes after parturition. Proliferation decrease as the
apoptosis increase, it is more evident in the maternal epithelium [1]. The
changes in the intracellular calcium concentration are related to cell death.
The response to the increase of intracellular calcium promotes the externalization of phosphatidilserina resulting in the case of mitochondria in
the liberation of the intermembrane protein namely cytochrome c, so it is
responsible for a formation of a caspase activation complex namely
apoptosome [2, 3]. We analyzed the calcium concentration using X-ray
ﬂuorescence and the percentage of apoptotic cells using ﬂow cytometry in
both non manipulated and cloned bovine placentome at different ages (90,
135, and 225) of gestation. Cloned samples showed an increase in the
calcium concentration [Ca] as far as in the percentage of apoptotic cells in
relation to non manipulated samples. Cloned samples with 90 days of
gestation showed 637.29 (mg gˉ1) of [Ca] and 50.85% of apoptosis, whereas
non manipulated showed 262.13 and 12.0%, respectively. To 135 days the
[Ca] was 445.38 (mg gˉ1) and the apoptosis 39.45% for cloned samples, and
257.96 (mg gˉ1) and 10.7% for non manipulated samples. To analyzed
samples from 225 days were 329.98 (mg gˉ1) of [Ca] and 39.4% of apoptosis,
whereas non manipulated showed 285.42 and 10.7%, respectively. The
current ﬁndings conﬁrm the relation between the calcium with the
percentage of apoptotic cells during the gestation.
Keywords: apoptosis, bovine placentome, calcium, ﬂow cytometry

[P1.22]
OCT-4 EXPRESSION IN EQUINE EMBRYOS
B.M. Cordeiro1, A.L.R. Franciolli2, P.O. Favaron*2, C.E. Ambrosio3, A.F. de
Carvalho4, M.A. Miglino2, 1Presbiterian University Mackenzie, Sao Paulo,
Brazil, Brazil, 2Dept. of Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, Brazil, 3Dept. of Basic Science, FZEA-USP,
Pirassununga, Brazil, Brazil, 4Dept. of Morphology, UNIfeob, Sao Joao da
Boa Vista, Sao Paulo, Brazil, Brazil
Researches involving stem cells showed the protein OCT-4 is the most used
as a marker of pluripotential it was ﬁrst described in embryonic cells. The
aim of this study was to identify the pluripotency of embryonic cells from
horse embryos through immunostaining for OCT-4. It was used 6 equine
embryos, with gestational ages between 21 and 28 days, ﬁxed in paraformaldeyde 4%, dehydrated and embedded in parafﬁn. Sequential slides of
5mm were carried out, followed by the processing for immunohistochemistry. There were realized 3 dilutions of antibody: 1:300, 1:400, and
1:500. Positive cells were identiﬁed in all embryos, and the better dilution
was 1:400. Embryos with 21 days of gestation showed positive marker in
the heart ventricle, liver, intestine, kidney (glomerulus and tubule), blood
cells and adrenal gland. Embryos with 25 days of gestation showed positive marker in the heart, liver, intestine, lung, kidney, gonads and somites.
The embryo with 26 days of gestation showed positive cells in the liver,
lung, spinal cord, kidney, somite and a strongly positive marking in the
heart. The embryo with 28 days, on the other hand, showed strongly
positive marking in liver and positive marker in kidney and choroid plexus.
Although it is described in literature that OCT-4 expression is restricted to
germ cells in rodents, pigs and cattle, our results showed the marking of
OCT-4 in equine embryos. We can also say that the staining was positive for
the liver, kidney and heart, mainly, elucidating that these stem cells were
scattered in the tissues, and demonstrating that some cells in these organs
have pluripotency to germ lines.
Keywords: OCT4, Immunohistochemistry, Embryo, Equine

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.29

[P1.23]
ORIGIN AND FATE OF INVERTED YOLK-SAC PLACENTA REVISED IN
GUINEA-PIG (CAVIA PORCELLUS) EMBRYOGENESIS

[P1.24]
FETOPLACENTAL GROWTH DYNAMICS IN THE VERVET MONKEY
(CHLOROCEBUS AETHIOPS)

C. Kanashiro*1,2, M.A. Miglino1, A.T. Yamada1, 1Institute of Biology,
University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil, 2Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine and Zootecnology, University of São Paulo, SP, Brazil

JN Rutherford*1, P Hurley2, MS Lawrence3, DE Redmond, Jr.4, 1University of
Illinois at Chicago, United States, 2St. Kitts Biomedical Research Foundation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, 3RxGen, United States, 4Yale University, United
States

Inverted yolk-sac placenta (IYSP) predicts direct exposure of extraembryonic endodermal cells to the maternal tissues which does not make
sense to the current paradigm of reproductive immunology. In the aim to
better understand the origin and organization of IYSP, we revised the
embryogenesis and placentation of guinea pig (Cavia porcellus). Pregnant
animals on gd 6th to 35th were perfusion ﬁxed for histological processing
and parafﬁn serial sections were evaluated by hematoxylin-eosin stain,
a panel of anti-cytokeratin immunocytochemistry and lectin cytochemistry. The anti-cytokeratin CK7 (M7018- Dako Co, USA) and Erytrina cristagali lectin selectively reacted with trophoblast cell and used to
distinguish these cells from blastocyst trophectoderm to all subsets found
in the fully developed placenta. The reconstruction of serial sections
showed two distinct cell mass in the gd 7th blastocyst cylinder. Different
from other embryos, the embryblast inner cell mass (ICM) growth positioned in blastocyst at antimesometrial side, separated from trophectoderm at mesometrial side forming trophoblast cell mass will originate the
ectoplacental cone. The early blastocele cavity was covered by CK7+
trophoblast single cell layer and the embryoblast of ICM facing the blastocele cavity will originate epiblast columnar cell sheet (gd 8-9th), while
latterly those facing the trophoctoderm differentiate to ﬂattened hypoblast
cell sheet (gd 9-10th). The hypoblast derived endoderm cells migrate
laterally through blastocele cavity to gradually form parietal endoderm of
the choriovitelline unit (gd 10-11th) covering yolk-sac cavity. By serial
sections of developing embryo, the organogenesis of amnion cavity,
allantoid and chorioamnioallantoid placenta were further reconstituted
for better understand of guinea pig embryogenesis. Taken all together, the
yolk sac placenta remains as intact extra-embryonic membrane through
the pregnancy without breaking of trophoblast sheet or exposing extraembryonic endoderm. The hypothesis of complete or partially IYSP seems
to be a miss understanding of guinea pig embryogenesis.
Grants: CAPES and FAPESP.
Keywords: Inverted yolkc-sac placenta, Guinea pig (Cavia porcellus),
Blastocyst

Fetal growth is largely mediated by placental growth and development. As
fetal growth accelerates later in pregnancy, there is a shift toward greater
placental efﬁciency. Much of the literature on placental efﬁciency across
gestation comes from murine, ovine, and porcine models that are not fully
applicable to primate fetal development and pregnancy, which are
uniquely shaped by a higher degree of maternal investment, placental
invasion, and fetal brain growth. A rare time series of 50 vervet monkey
(Chlorocebus aethiops) fetuses and placentas from the St. Kitts Biomedical
Research Foundation was examined to characterize the shift in placental
efﬁciency across the latter half of gestation, days 83-159 of a speciestypical 167-day gestation. Both fetal mass and placental mass increased
signiﬁcantly with gestational age (Pearson's correlations: r¼0.85,
p<0.001; r¼0.64, p<0.01, respectively), but this growth was not
symmetrical. Placental efﬁciency during period 2 (d. 131-159) was 43%
greater than that of period 1 (d. 83-130) (T-test: t¼-3.60, p<0.001), indicating that there is a signiﬁcant shift in the functional properties of the
placenta as gestation progresses in the vervet monkey. The plateau in
placental growth in the vervet monkey occurs around day 130. The
microscopic morphology of the maternal-fetal interface of the placenta
will be considered as a key mechanism in the nature and temporality of
this functional shift.
Keywords: placental efﬁciency, vervet monkey, fetal growth, morphology

[P1.25]
YOLK SAC DEVELOPMENT OF SHEEP EMBRYOS
A.G.T. PESSOLATO*1, M.L.V. ALBERTO1, A.L.R. FRANCIOLLI1, D.S. MARTINS2,
M.A. MIGLINO1, 1Surgery Department of Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
and Animal Science - University of São Paulo, Brazil, Brazil, 2Department of
Animal Science, FZEA-USP, Brazil, Brazil
The yolk sac is the only embryonic attachment present in all species of
vertebrate embryos. In eutherian mammals it is initially large, but subsides
when the deﬁnitive placenta develops. This study aimed to characterize
gross and microscopically the yolk sac from sheep embryos at 15 and 25
days of gestation. Five yolk sacs were ﬁxed in Methacarn for microscopic
analysis. The embryo at 15 days showed yolk sac located in the ventral
region, whitish and form a "V". The results showed blood islands
throughout the membrane region and delineation of three layers (mesoderm, endoderm and mesenchyme). The yolk sac of the embryo at 21 days
showed orange color, vascularization and blood islands with large
amounts of primitive blood cells, however regions of apoptosis. The
embryo at 22 days presented the yolk sac had dark orange color, smaller
size and blood islands of larger size with a large number of cells within
them. In the embryo of 23 days, the yolk sac had reddened and reeled to
the umbilical cord, overlapping the amnion. Microscopically showed large
amount of blood islands of greater size in the entire length of the
membrane and demarcation of the three cell layers. The embryo of 25 days
showed yolk sac in the regression phase, with reddish, moving away from
the ventral region of the embryo. Microscopic ﬁndings showed a blood
grouping of islands, occupying large area of the membrane and apoptosis.
The yolk sac was modiﬁed according to the embryonic period in color,
appearance, size and location. Microscopically the yolk sac blood islands
are grouped as a result of advancing gestational period and hematopoietic
established, in addition to evidence apoptosis.
Keywords: sheep embryo, yolk sac, development, morphology

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.30

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.26]
BOVINE PLACENTA LIPID PROFILING BY DIRECT INJECTION MASS
SPECTROMETRY

[P1.27]
IMPRINTED GENE NETWORK IMPLICATION IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF
EXTRA EMRYONIC TISSUES AND PLACENTA IN COW

C.E. Ambrósio*1, E.C. Cabral2, F. Perecin1, D.S. Martins1, R.P.C. Gerger3,
L.R. Bertolini4 et al, 1Faculty of Animal Sciences and Food Engineering,
University of São Paulo, Pirassununga, Brazil, Brazil, 2ThoMSon Mass
Spectrometry Laboratory, University of Campinas, Brazil, Brazil, 3Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil,
Brazil, 4Medical School, University of Fortaleza, Brazil

H JAMMES*, M Guillomot, G Taghouti, E Campion, J.F. Oudin, S Degrelle
et al, 1UMR 1198, Biology of development and reproduction, Institut
National de la Recherche Agronomique, France, 2Laboratory of Mammalian
Genome BiologyUniversity Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, United States

Mass spectrometry (MS) is a leading analytical technique for lipidomic
studies. It allows the detection of intact molecules from complex lipid
extracts, also providing chemical structural information by using a molecule fragmentation approach (MS/MS). Usually, liquid chromatrography
coupled to MS is used for lipid species separation. Herein we proposed the
use of electrospray ionization (ESI) MS for the direct proﬁling (i.e., without
previous separation) of placental lipid extracts. Chorion allantoic samples
were collected from bovine placentae on Day 225 of gestation (n¼3) and
placentomes at term (n¼2) one as control and other from somatic cell
nuclear transfer bovine. Samples were submitted to Bligh & Dyer lipid
extraction protocol. A Waters Micromass Q-TOF mass spectrometer
equipped with an ESI source was used for the experiments. Lipid extracts
were resuspended in methanol/chloroform (7:3) with 0.1% formic acid and
sodium and injected using a syringe pump at a rate of 10 mL/min. Lipid
species detected in the positive ion mode at the mass range of 500-1200 m/
z were mostly sodiated ions represented by sphingomyelins (as [SM 16:0) +
Na+], phosphocholines (mainly [PC (34:2) + Na+], [PC (34:1) + Na+], [PC
(36:3) + Na+], [PC (36:2) + Na+], and [PC (36:1) + Na+], and sodiated triacyglicerols composed of 50-52 carbon chain-long unsaturated acyl groups
with 1 to 3 double bonds [as TAG(52:1) + Na+, for example]. It is broadly
known that placental function and morphology may be altered in some
concepti derived from in vitro fertilization (IVF) and nuclear transfer (NT)
procedures. Further experiments using placental samples on the negative
ion mode will likely increase the detection of additional lipid species. In
conclusion, the use of direct injection of placental lipid extracts by ESI-MS
allows a rapid and useful detection of a range of lipid classes that may be
involved in placental structure and metabolism. This strategy will
contribute to the understanding of the pathophysiology underlying altered
placental function and morphology in bovine placentae from IVF- and NTderived bovine concepti. Financial support: FAPESP, CAPES and CNPq.
Keywords: lipidomics, clone catle placenta, bovine, comparative
placentation

The newly described1 Imprinted Gene Network (IGN), is clearly implicated
in the control of differentiation and growth of the foeto-placental unit2. In
mice, it has been established that In Vitro Fertilization3,4 (IVF) impacts the
expression regulation of the IGN. In order to validate the universal biological signiﬁcance of this IGN, we analysed it in bovine species. Moreover,
we compared different reproductive technologies, taking advantage to the
opportunity to use reproductive cloning (Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer,
SCNT) in this species.
Our present objective is to analyze the IGN in cow to understand i) how the
coordinated pattern of gene expression could take place during early
developmental stages in extra embryonic tissues and placenta ii) which
the cellular localization of the expression of these genes and iii) which
molecular processes are involved in the transcriptional control. The analyses were performed in different extra embryonic tissues and in placenta,
at different gestational stages and following different reproductive
technologies.
Twenty genes are implicated in the IGN, such as H19, Igf2, Igf2r, Phlda2,
p57kip2, Dcn, DLK1, Gtl2, Grb10, Mest, Peg3. Firstly, we veriﬁed the
imprinted status of these genes. Using crossbreeding between two French
bovine species (Holstein X Charolais) to generate Single Nucleotide Polymorphism, we determined the heterozygosis in genomic DNA and
researched the loss of heterozygosis in cDNA generated from RNA of extraembryonic tissues. Secondly, we quantiﬁed the gene expression by qRTPCR and determined the speciﬁc-cell lineage localization by In situ
hybridization. Finally, we analysed the methylation status of the differential methylated regions (DMRs; closely related to imprinted status) and
of the promoter regions by bisulﬁte conversion of genomic DNA and
pyrosequencing.
The results highlighted a spatio- temporal regulation of the expression of
the IGN suggesting a major role of these genes in the development of the
extra-embryonic tissues and placenta in cow., This study was supported by
a grant from the EU (Cutting Edge genomics for Sustainable Animal
Breeding; SABRE contrat-CT-2006-01625). The authors wish to thanks the
technicians of the experimental farm (UCEA; INRA) at Bressonvilliers for
animal management.
1

Varrault et al., Dev. Cell, 2006; 2Gabory et al., Development. 2009; 3Fauque
et al., Hum Mol Genet. 2010; 4Fauque et al., PLoS One. 2010)
Keywords: Imprinting, DNA methylation, gene expression, reproductive
technologies

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.31

[P1.28]
GENE EXPRESSION IN THE PLACENTA OF A PRECOCIAL SPECIES - THE
SPINY MOUSE

[P1.29]
IMMUNOLOCALIZATION OF THE CAVEOLINS IN THE MATERNAL-FETAL
INTERACTION IN TERM CLONED CATTLE PLACENTA

B.A. O'Connell*1, C.T. Roberts2, K.M. Moritz3, D.W. Walker1, H. Dickinson1,
1
Monash Institute of Medical Research, Australia, 2Robinson Institute,
Australia, 3School of Biomedical Sciences, Australia

FTV Pereira*1, FV Meirelles2, J Osorio1, TRG Orsalino1, AC Assis Neto1, MA
Miglino2, 1Sao Paulo State University, UNESP Dracena, Brazil, 2University of
Sao Paulo -USP, Brazil

Introduction: The long gestation of the spiny mouse (39 days) relative to
other rodents renders this species useful to study precocial fetal and
neonatal development, as pregnancy ends after major organogenesis is
complete. Less is known about placental development; speciﬁcally, what
might be necessary to support fetal growth and development to term. It is
known that the placental labyrinth is present from approximately day (d)
20 of gestation. Therefore we quantiﬁed the expression of genes known to
be involved in labyrinth development. We also examined expression of
genes which facilitate nutrient transfer in the placenta.
Methods: Glial cell missing 1 (Gcm1), Mitogen activated protein kinase
kinase 1 (Map2k1), Glucose transporter 1 (Glut1), Insulin-like Growth Factor 1
(Igf1), Vascular endothelial growth factor A (Vegfa), and Vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor 2 (Vegfr2) were examined across gestation using
qPCR.
Results: Increases in Map2k1 and Gcm1 were observed at the time (d20)
when the labyrinth could be ﬁrst clearly distinguished. Increases in Glut1
in the Junctional Zone, and Igf1 (in the labyrinth) were greatest when the
labyrinth reached its maximum size relative to the placenta as a whole on
d25. Vegfa in the labyrinth increased steadily until term; expression of its
receptor (Vegfr2) in the labyrinth was relatively constant from d20 to term.
Discussion: The increase in Gcm1 and Map2k1 coincide with the structural
development of the labyrinth, consistent with transgenic mouse studies
showing these genes are essential for labyrinth development. The increase
in Glut1 and Igf1, observed after the labyrinth reaches its relative
maximum size suggests increasing capacity of labyrinth tissue to allocate
nutrients necessary to support the exponential increase of fetal growth
that occurs after this time. The expression patterns of Vegf and its receptor
suggests that vascular development is an ongoing process in the spiny
mouse placenta throughout gestation
Keywords: Spiny Mouse, Labyrinth Development, Map2k1, Vegf

This work was conducted in order to analyse the contribution of the caveolins -1, -2 and -3 proteins in the placental transport by immunohistochemistry since that proteins are implicated in internalization of substances
into the cells and in many signaling functions. In our work we utilized cloned
fetuses produced by nuclear transfer of somatic cells. Histology and immunohistochemistry (anti- caveolin -1, -2 e -3) were performed on placentomes
and uteri from 5 cloned (term gestation) and 5 controls in the same gestation
period. The tissues were snap-frozen or formalin ﬁxed. The caveolins -1 were
localized in the fetal and maternal villi, but stronger in the endometrial
stroma. Caveolins -2: positive stain in the trophoblast and speciﬁcally in
a trophoblast giant binucleate cell (BNC). Caveolins -3: positive in the
trophoblast epithelium and in BNC, endometrial stroma and in the muscular
layer of the placental vessels. This suggests that caveolins -1, -2 and -3 could
participate in the placental transport, mainly in internalization of substances
into maternal and fetus cells of the maternal-fetal interaction and inﬂuence
the occurrence of abnormalities in the in cloned cattle placenta.
Funding: FAPESP and PROPE UNESP
Keywords: placental transport, caveolins, cloned cattle placenta,
Imunolocalization
[P1.30]
GFP EXPRESSION IN TROPHOBLAST CELLS OF TRANSGENIC CLONED
BOVINE PLACENTA
RNB Barreto*1,2, FF Bressan1, LJ Oliveira1, MA Miglino2, FV Meirelles1,
FTV Pereira3, 1LMMD, ZAB, FZEA, University of São Paulo, Brazil, 2VCI,
FMVZ, University of São Paulo, Brazil, 3São Paulo State University, Brazil
Introduction: The migratory ability of trophoblast giant binucleated cells
(TGC) towards to maternal tissues has been previously described in many
species including the bovine. These cells migrate and fuse with maternal
epithelial cells to deliver fetal proteins to maternal side. TGCs are reported
to express speciﬁc proteins, such as, placental lactogens and pregnancy
associated glycoproteins. In cloned bovine placenta an increase of TGCs
number accompanied to many other placental abnormalities was reported.
Herein, we used the transgenic GFP cloned embryo model to evaluate the
migration of fetal cells in the bovine placenta.
Methods: Samples of placentome and intercaruncular endometrium from
pregnant and nonpregnant uterine horns were obtained from GFP transgenic cloned embryo pregnancies at 60 (n¼3) and 90 (n¼3) days. Samples
were preserved in 4% buffered PFA and parafﬁn-embedded for immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis or snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for western
blotting (WB), Real time PCR and ﬂuorescence microscopy.
Results: Through this model we expected to observe the migration of TGCs
to maternal tissues. However no positive cells for GFP were observed in
maternal side. The IHC analysis showed a lack GFP expression in the TGCs
whereas the expression of the GFP was observed throughout the trophoblastic cells in all analyzed samples. In WB analysis, as expected GFP was
present in placentome and placental membranes. We also observed GFP
expression in the intercaruncular endometrial samples from both pregnant and non-pregnant uterine horns.
Conclusion: The absence of expression of GFP in TGCs suggests that a GFP
gene silencing in response to the highly speciﬁc protein synthetic proﬁle.
Presence of GFP in intercaruncular region and non-pregnant uterine horn
tissues may be generated by the high GFP solubility or by other mechanisms allowing permeability of the uterus to fetal protein products during
pregnancy in the cow.
Funded by FAPESP.
Keywords: Green Fluorescent Protein, Trophoblast Giant Cell, Transgenic
Cloned Embryo

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.32

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.31]
EXPRESSION OF TIGHT JUNCTIONAL PROTEINS IS NOT NECESSARILY
ASSOCIATED WITH PHYSIOLOGICAL BARRIER FUNCTION IN CULTURED
BOVINE PLACENTAL CELLS
M. Dilly, N. Hambruch, J.-D. Haeger, C. D. Pfarrer*, University of Veterinary
Medicine Hannover, Germany
Introduction: Tight junctions (TJ) are a parameter for cellular polarity due
to their ability to regulate the paracellular ﬂow of molecules and to
separate molecules into apical and basolateral domains. In the synepitheliochorial bovine placenta the feto-maternal barrier is composed of
maternal caruncular epithelial cells and trophoblast cells interdigitating
with each other via a microvillous brush border. Any substance passing
from one compartment to the other has to move through these two layers.
To study fetal-maternal interaction and transportation through the
feto-maternal barrier in vitro, the aim of this study was to characterize
junctional complexes, as well as polarity and barrier function in bovine
caruncular epithelial cells (BCEC-1) and trophoblast cells (F3).
Methods: The presence of TJ in cultured bovine placenta cells was evaluated by immunohistochemistry of TJ proteins such as ZO-2, occludin and
claudin. TJ complexes were visualized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Furthermore, BCEC-1 and F3 cells were examined morphologically by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The barrier function of TJ
was assessed by measuring the transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER)
in cells growing on inserts.
Results: ZO-2, occludin and claudin-11 were detected in BCEC-1 and F3
cells by immunoﬂuorescence. Junctional complexes occurred frequently in
BCEC-1 but were observed less numerous in F3 by TEM. SEM showed that
the apical cell membrane of BCEC-1 and F3 cells was covered densely with
microvilli. F3 cells did not form compact monolayers as seen in BCEC-1.
Only light microscopically conﬂuent BCEC-1 developed considerable TEER
values, while F3 cells developed no detectable resistance.
Conclusions: Our results have shown that cultured bovine placental cells
are polarized and exhibit junctional complexes. However, only maternal
BCEC-1 cells develop a functional physiological barrier. From these in vitro
studies, we speculate that different properties of permeability are present
in the maternal and fetal compartment of the bovine placenta.
Keywords: bovine, trophoblast, caruncular epithelium, tight junctions

[P1.32]
SYSTEMIC MATERNAL-FETAL TOLERANCE IN COWS
J Monteiro, R Bosch, T Chucri, A Lima, M Salvadori, J Kfoury Junior*,
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil
The conceptus is a semi-alogeneic graft so the maternal immune system is
constantly challenged by it. Therefore, for its successful implantation and
development, several immune-regulatory mechanisms, local and
systemic, are activated to tolerate the conceptus antigens. They include the
regulatory roles of CD4+CD25+Foxp3 T cells, indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase
enzyme- IDO, uterine macrophages, T cell Ig and mucin domain (Tim)-3
among others. Nevertheless, most of this data originates from rodents and
human observation. Differently from these species, bovines have a synepitheliochorial type placenta, practically non-invasive, that drastically
reduces the conceptus antigens exposure to the maternal immune system.
Little is known regarding the tolerance mechanisms in this species and
how do they behave in this context. Therefore, this work aimed to verify if
there is any systemic immune-tolerance in pregnant cows by accessing
some innate and adaptive immune responses features, as the capacity of
proliferation of the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and their
phagocytic capacity, respectively.
Peripheral blood of six non-pregnant and twelve pregnant cows was used.
The PBMC was separated by Ficoll-Paque, added 10 mM of CFSE, treated
with Concanavalin A, incubated and analyzed by ﬂow cytometry. The
phagocytic capacity was conducted using a commercial kit PhrodoTM and
analyzed by ﬂow cytometry. The results demonstrate that the proliferation
of the PBMC of non-pregnant cows stimulated with Concanavalin A was
signiﬁcantly higher (p < 0.001) than those of pregnant cows disregarding
the gestational period. The phagocytic capacity of pregnant cows was
reduced when compared to non-pregnant animals (p < 0.05). The reduced
proliferation index of peripheral lymphocytes as well as the phagocytic
capacity of macrophages from PBMC of pregnant cows compared to nonpregnant ones strongly suggests a systemic regulation of the maternal
immune response.
Keywords: Immune-tolerance, Bovine, Lymphocyte Proliferation, Phagocytic Capacity

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.33]
WHAT IS GOING ON WITH NON-PREGNANT HORN IN PLAINS
VISCACHA?
MA Flamini1, E Portiansky1, PO Favaron2, DS Martins3, A Mess4, MA
Miglino*2 et al, 1Faculty of Veterinary Science, La Plata University,
Argentina, 2Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, University
of Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Faculty of Animal Sciences and Food Engineering,
University of São Paulo, Brazil, 4Museum of Natural History, Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and Biodiversity at the Humboldt University
Berlin, Germany
Plains viscacha Lagostomus maximus maximus (Rodentia, Hystricognathi,
Chinchillidae) belongs to Argentine wild faune. Various studies so far deal
with their very distinct characteristics of reproductive parameters and
endocrine organs. In particular, female viscachas produced around
300-800 ova at each cycle, but only 10% were fertilized, resulting in 2
offspring with advanced developmental status (Mossman & Duke, 1973). In
its natural environmental plains viscacha had a monoestrous cycle, but in
captivity they could be polyoestrous. However, there are still only few data
on the reproductive system itself. We therefore investigated structural
parameters of the early developmental processes. Four female reproductive apparatus were obtained from Estación de Cría de Animales Silvestres,
Buenos Aires, Argentine; the necropsy was performed at the Faculty of
Veterinary Science, La Plata University, and ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde.
Samples were processed for light microscopy in the Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine and Animal Science, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. Sections of
5mm were stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Female reproductive
system was composed by two ovaries, two uterine tubes, a bicornuate
uterus, and one vagina. After the mean cycle, early embryologic stages
were present in both uterine horns. Multiple implantations were observed
in the uterine horns, in a variable number and shape, but not exceeding 6
for each horn. These implantations showed a clustered appearance while
proceeding pregnancy. Implantations near to uterine tube were associated
with a dark color of the uterine body as well as amorphous appearance and
irregular shape. Larger implantations showed light color with a circular
cavity. When studied late stages of pregnancy were only found embryos
near to the uterine body, while the others had disappeared. Data suggest
the position of the implantating eggs in uterine horns is crucial for its
developmental success and the uterine tissue has the power to regulate
implantation processes.
Keywords: Lagostomus maximus, female reproductive apparatus, uterus,
morphology

A.33

[P1.34]
MATERNAL TREATMENTS WITH FOLIC ACID AND SAFFLOWER OIL
PREVENT MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASES OVERACTIVITY IN THE
EMBRYO AND DECIDUA FROM DIABETIC RATS
R Higa*, E Capobianco, M Kurtz, A Jawerbaum, Laboratory of Reproduction
and Metabolism, CEFYBO-CONICET, School of Medicine, University of
Buenos Aires., Argentina
Introduction: Maternal diabetes induces embryo malformations, related
to the intrauterine pro-inﬂammatory environment. Maternal treatments
with folic acid and safﬂower oil (enriched in linoleic acid, an endogenous
agonist of peroxisome proliferator activated receptors (PPARs)) can
prevent congenital malformations, although the mechanisms involved are
unclear. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are proteolytic enzymes
involved in developmental processes that can be overactivated in a proinﬂammatory environment.
Aim: To analyze the effects of maternal treatments with folic acid (FOL)
and/or safﬂower oil (SAF) on oxidative stress and MMPs activities in the
embryo and decidua from control and diabetic rats on day 10.5 of
pregnancy.
Methods: Diabetes was induced in rats by streptozotocin administration
(50 mg/kg) prior to mating. Treatments with FOL (0.5% s.c.) and SAF (6%,
dietary supplementantion) were given from days 0.5 to 10.5 of gestation.
Isoprostanes and TBARs were measured as indexes of oxidative stress.
MMP-2 and MMP-9 activities were measured by zymography.
Results: Embryos from diabetic rats showed increased levels of isoprostanes (p<0.01) when compared to controls, whereas FOL and FOL+SAF
treatments prevented these anomalies (p<0.001). TBARs were increased in
decidua from diabetic rats (p<0.05) when compared to controls and were
highly reduced by SAF, FOL and FOL+SAF (p<0.001). In embryos from
diabetic rats MMP-2 and MMP-9 activities were enhanced (p<0.05),
whereas both SAF (p<0.05) and FOL+SAF (p<0.05) prevented MMPs
overactivation. The decidua from diabetic rats showed enhanced activity of
MMP-2 and MMP-9 (p<0.001), SAF diminished MMP9 overactivity
(p<0.05) and FOL+SAF reduced both MMP-2 and MMP-9 (p<0.01) overactivities. The elevated malformation rate in diabetic rats (p<0.001) was
reduced with maternal treatments with FOL, SAF and FOL+SAF (p<0.05).
Conclusions: In embryos and decidua from diabetic rats, FOL and SAF have
the ability to reduce the malformation rate at least in part through the
regulation of oxidative stress and MMPs overactivity.
Keywords: matrix metalloproteinases, inﬂammation, folic acid, PPARs

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.34

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.35]
IMPACT OF MATERNAL MILD HYPERGLYCEMIA ON RAT OFFSPRING
DEVELOPMENT AND BEHAVIOR
DC Damasceno*1, ACI Kiss1, YK Sinzato1, MM Bernardi2, MVC Rudge1,
B Woodside3, 1São Paulo State University (Unesp), Botucatu Medical
School, Laboratory of Experimental Research of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
São Paulo., Brazil, 2University of São Paulo (USP), Department of Pathology,
School of Veterinary Medicine, São Paulo., Brazil, 3Concordia University,
Center for Studies in Behavioral Neurobiology, Montreal, Quebec., Canada
Introduction: Exposure to the diabetic intrauterine milieu has long been
recognized to have important consequences for the fetus and the newborn
[1,2,3,4]. The present study aimed to evaluate the impact of maternal mild
hyperglycemia of Wistar rats on female and male offspring development
and behavior in different moments of life.
Methods: At birth, female rats were assigned either to Control (subcutaneous (sc) citrate buffer;n¼20) or STZ group (streptozotocin (STZ)-100 mg/
kg-sc.;n¼61). Rats were mated (90 days) and on pregnancy day (PD) 15 the
insulin tolerance test (ITT) was carried out and on PD17 the glucose
tolerance test (GTT). Glycemia was measured on PD 0, 7, 14 and 21. Around
PD22 the rats delivered naturally and the newborns were classiﬁed
according to their birth weight (First generation–F1). At birth, F1 newborns
were divided into 4 groups: male offspring of control mothers (MControl;n
¼93); female offspring of control mothers (FControl;n¼74); male offspring
of diabetic mothers (MSTZ;n¼76), and female offspring of diabetic
mothers (FSTZ;n¼103). Physical development was daily evaluated. Body
weight, length and anogenital distance were measured. Behavioral activity
was evaluated in an open ﬁeld.
Results: STZ rats presented increased glycemia on PD0 and impaired
glucose tolerance when compared to Control rats. Offspring from STZ dams
presented increased body weight on postnatal day (PND) 0. Physical
landmarkers of development such as pinna unfolding and eye opening
were forwarded in the STZ rats offspring while hair growth was delayed.
Open ﬁeld behavior showed decreased immobility in offspring of diabetic
dams in PND10 for females and PND75 for males.
Discussion: Streptozotocin administration in the neonatal period caused
mild hyperglycemia during pregnancy. Offspring of diabetic dams presented alterations in physical development landmarkers and open ﬁled
parameters, in agreement with other studies [5,6,7], thus concluding that
even a mild hyperglycemia during pregnancy is enough to impair offspring
development and behavior.
1. Cordero, L.; Landon, M. B. Infant of the diabetic mother. Clin Perinatol
1993, 20(3):635-648.
2. Leslie, R.; Pyke, D.; John, P.; White, J. Hemoglobin a1 in diabetic pregnancy. Lancet 1978, 2:958-962.
3. Miller, E.; Hare, J. W.; Cloherty, J. P.; Dunn, P. J.; Gleason, R. E.; Soeldner,
J. S.; Kitzmiller, J. L. Elevated maternal hemoglobin a1c in early pregnancy
and major congenital anomalies in infants of diabetic mothers. N Engl J
Med 1981, 304(22):1331-1334.
4. Kiss, A.C.I.; Lima, P.H.O.; Sinzato, Y.K.; Takaku, M.; Takeno, M.A.; Rudge,
M.V.C.; Damasceno, D.C. Animal models for clinical and gestational diabetes: maternal and fetal outcomes. Diabetol Metab Syndr 2009, 19(1):21.
5. Johansson, B.; Meyerson, B.; Eriksson, U.J. Behavioral effects of an
intrauterine or neonatal diabetic environment in the rat. Biol Neonate
1991, 59:226-235.
6. Ramanathan, M.; Jaiswal, A. K.; Bhattacharya, S. K. Hyperglycaemia in
pregnancy: Effects on the offspring behaviour with special reference to
anxiety paradigms. Indian J Exp Biol 2000, 38(3):231-236.
7. Kinney, B.A.; Rabe, M.B.; Jensen, R.A.; Steger, R.W. Maternal hyperglycemia leads to gender-dependent deﬁcits in learning and memory in
offspring. Exp Biol Med 2003, 228:152-159.
Keywords: Mild Hyperglycemia, Behavior, Offspring, Development

[P1.36]
MATERNAL-FETAL REPERCUSSIONS OF TREATMENT WITH AZADIRACHTA INDICA (NEEM) IN DIABETIC AND NON-DIABETIC PREGNANT
RATS: PRELIMINARY RESULTS
Debora Damasceno*1, Bruna Dallaqua1, Tiago Rodrigues2, Felipe Saito1,
Marilza Rudge1, 11Botucatu Medical School, UNESP – São Paulo State
University, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Laboratory of
Experimental Research in Gynecology and Obstetrics, São Paulo State,
Brazil, 2ABC Federal University (UFABC), Center of Natural and Human
Sciences (CCNH), Brazil
Introduction: Women with poorly controlled Diabetes mellitus have
a much higher incidence of pregnancy complications1. In Brazil, Azadirachta indica (Neem) is one plant frequently used as anti-diabetic remedies2. The aim was to investigate the effects of oral treatment with Neem
oil on maternal reproductive outcome; fetal and placental development of
the diabetic and non-diabetic pregnant rats.
Methods: Diabetes was induced by streptozotocin (100 mg/kg, sc)3 in
Wistar rats (mild diabetes group - MD) on the day of birth. As adults, rats
were mated and, when positive diagnosis of pregnancy was identiﬁed,
were distributed into 4 experimental groups: G1) Non-diabetic treated
with vehicle; G2) Non-diabetic treated with Neem oil (1.2 mL/day) during
whole pregnancy; G3) MD treated with vehicle; G4) MD treated with
Neem oil in the pregnancy. Glycemia was measured at days 0 and 20 of
pregnancy. At term pregnancy, each rat was anesthetized and killed for
reproductive performance analysis, fetal and placental weights. Maternal
and fetal data were analyzed by ANOVA followed by the Student Newman–
Keuls test.
Results: G3 rats presented higher glycemia on day 0 of pregnancy and
reduced fetal weight (4.141.08g, p<0.05) compared to other groups
(G1¼5.170.86g; G2¼5.100.43; G4¼5.230.49g). It was veriﬁed signiﬁcantly increased liver weight in the G2 (18.302.36g) and G4
(18.201.76g) groups compared to their control groups (G1¼13.130.01;
G3¼15.301.50g). The placental weight showed no alteration in the
different groups.
Discussion: Neem oil caused alteration lipid metabolism leading increased
liver weight, which suggests a liver steatosis. However, there were no
alterations on the maternal reproductive outcome but there was an
improvement in fetal weight from diabetic rats after treatment. Thus,
using the data obtained at the present moment, we concluded this product
contributed to avoid intrauterine growth restriction caused by diabetes.
FINANCIAL SUPPORT: FAPESP (Number Process: 09/14147-8)
References:
1. American Diabetes Association (ADA). Report of the Expert Committee
on the Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care,
2009; 32 (Suppl 1):S62-7.
2. Damasceno DC, Volpato GT. Antidiabetic botanical extracts. In: Ronald R.
Watson; Victor R. Preedy, editors. Botanical Medicine in Clinical Practice,
2008; p. 547-51.
3. Triadou N, Portha B, Picon L, Rosselin G. Experimental chemical diabetes
and pregnancy in the rat. Diabetes, 1982; 31: 75-9.
Keywords: diabetes, fetus, Azadirachta indica (Neem), pregnancy, rats

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.37]
PERIVASCULAR CELLS OF FETOPLACENTAL VESSELS IN PREGNANCIES
COMPLICATED BY TYPE I DIABETES MELLITUS
T Kucera*1, I Vyletel1, M Moravcova2, V Krejci2, Z Zizka2, M Jirkovska1,
1
Institute of Histology and Embryology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University in Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, First Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital in
Prague, Czech Republic
Introduction: Angiogenesis takes place in the placenta until delivery as
demonstrated by expression of markers for neovasculature in the placenta
at term. Perivascular cells such as smooth muscle cells and pericytes
participate in the vascular wall formation in neovessels. Here we studied
the extent of pericyte coverage in microvessels of normal pregnancies and
pregnancies complicated by type I diabetes mellitus (DMI). In addition, we
characterized the phenotype of pericytes in normal and DMI pregnancies.
Material and Methods: The placentas from normal pregnancies (n¼8) and
placentas from mothers with DMI (n¼18) were obtained at the time of
delivery. The specimens were collected using unbiased systematic random
sampling, ﬁxed with formaldehyde and embedded in parafﬁn. Immunohistochemical detection was performed using standard procedures.
Results: Pericytes of capillaries in terminal and intermediate villi were
immunoreactive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), but they were negative
for intermediate ﬁlament desmin. In addition, perivascular cells expressed
PDGFR-beta, although the expression was variable. We thus used SMA as
a marker for quantitation of pericyte coverage in placental microvessels.
The proportion of capillaries covered with SMA+ pericytes (microvessel
pericyte coverage index) was 8413% in normal vs. 79,513% in DMI
pregnancies. Extent of pericyte coverage around the vessel circumference
was 3811% in normal vs. 3310% in DMI pregnancies.
Discussion: Immunohistochemical phenotyping of perivascular cells in
human fetoplacental vessels showed that pericytes surrounding capillaries
in terminal and intermediate villi are SMA+/desmin- perivascular cells.
This further demonstrates great variability of these cells in different
organs. The phenotype of pericytes in normal pregnancies and in pregnancies complicated with DMI was virtually identical. A statistically
signiﬁcant difference in the extent of pericyte coverage around the vessel
circumference between DMI and normal pregnancies was not found.
The work was supported by the Research Project MSM 0021620807 and
Grant GACR No.304/09/0733.
Keywords: angiogenesis, pericytes, capillaries, diabetes mellitus

A.35

[P1.38]
VASOCONSTRICTION INDUCED BY SEROTONIN IS REDUCED BY
ADENOSINE IN HUMAN UMBILICAL VEINS FROM GESTATIONAL
DIABETES
Fredi Cifuentes*, Javier Palacios, José Luis Vega, Paola Casanello, Luis
Sobrevia, Universidad de Antofagasta, Chile
Adenosine is a vasoactive nucleoside that contributes to the physiological
vasomotor function of the human umbilical vein. Adenosine-triggered
signalling mechanism have been shown to be altered in umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVEC) from gestational diabetic pregnancies, an effect
proposed to be determinant for the abnormal vasoreactivity observed in
response to vasoconstrictors or vasodilators in gestational diabetes. We
evaluated adenosine role on 5-hydroxytriptamine (5HT)-induced vasoconstriction in isolated human umbilical vein (HUV) rings from normal
(HUV-N) and gestational diabetic (HUV-GD) pregancies.
Methods: HUV intact or endothelium-denuded rings were mounted in
a wire myograph to determine vasoactive response to 5HT (0.1 nM - 10
mM). HUV rings were preincubated (1 min) in absence or presence of
adenosine (0.1 mM-1 mM) and ZM241385 (10 mM, A2A adenosine receptors
antagonist). Responses were expressed as a percentage of KCl-induced
contraction (%Kmax).
Results: 5HT-induced contraction in intact HUV-GD exhibited higher
(P<0.05, two way ANOVA test) half-maximal effect (EC50 33  4 nM 5HT)
compared with HUV-N (11  1 nM 5HT), an effect that was independent of
endothelium. Adenosine mimicked gestational diabetes effect in the
response to 5HT (EC50 39  5 nM 5HT at 10 mM adenosine) in HUV-N, but
did not alter the vascular response in HUV-GD. Adenosine effects were
blocked by ZM241385 and independent of endothelium. In addition,
ZM241385 in absence of exogenous adenosine blocked the effect of
gestational diabetes on 5HT-induced vasoconstriction.
Conclusion: Gestational diabetes is associated with altered umbilical vein
reactivity to vasoconstrictors most likely due to activation of A2A adenosine receptors by adenosine. The vasocontrsitcion induced by 5HT seems
not to involve the vascular endothelium in this phenomenon.
Supported by CONICYT ACT-73 (PIA), FONDECYT 1070865 & 1080534,
Chile.
Keywords:
Gestational
Diabetes,
Endothelium,
Vasocontriction,
Adenosine

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.36

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.39]
FETAL-DERIVED ENDOTHELIAL PROGENITOR CELLS MAY CONTRIBUTE
TO PLACENTAL VASCULATURE AND THE PATHOGENESIS OF IUGR

[P1.40]
ENHANCED PROLIFERATION OF JEG3 CELLS IN RESPONSE TO BENZO[A]
PYRENE: IMPLICATIONS FOR INTRAUTERINE GROWTH RESTRICTION

P Sipos*1, C Hubel2, M Wareing1, C Sibley1, P Baker1,3, I Crocker1, 1Maternal
and Fetal Health Research Center, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2MageeWomens Research Institute, Pittsburgh, United States, 3The University of
Alberta, Canada

I.N. Olomu*, B.V. Madhukar, Michigan State University, United States

Introduction: Circulating Endothelial Progenitor Cells (EPCs) are recruited
from the bone marrow and contribute to vessel formation. One subpopulation, Endothelial Colony Forming cells (ECFCs), form endothelium. A
second subpopulation, Circulating Angiogenic Cells (CACs), stimulate
ECFCs. We aimed to investigate (1) whether EPCs migrate to the placenta
from the human fetus and contribute to its vasculature; and (2) whether in
intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) the amounts of EPCs sequestered by
the placenta differ or their proliferative capacity is changed.
Methods: (a) CAC- and ECFC- blood counts (as percentage of mononuclear
cells) were determined by ﬁve-colour ﬂow cytometry in the umbilical
arteries and veins of 23 normal and 9 growth restricted newborns (Individualised Birth Weight Ratio<5) at 36-41 gestational weeks. ECFCs were
deﬁned as 7AAD-/CD31bright/CD45-/KDR+/CD34+ and CACs as 7AAD-/
CD31+/CD45/CD133+/CD34+1.
(b) ECFCs were isolated from fetal peripheral mononuclear cells by
a culture technique, which selectively propagates these cells2. The
phenotype of outgrowth cells was carefully conﬁrmed by a range of
established surface markers and functional assays.3
Results: (1)CAC- and ECFC-levels were signiﬁcantly higher in the umbilical
artery than vein (CAC:5.5x10-1[2.7 x10-1-8.2 x10-1] vs. 4.0x10-1[1.8 x10-17.1x10-1];p<0.05,n¼13, ECFC:3.0x10-3[7.2x10-4-7.0x10-3] vs. 5.0x10-4[0.02.4x10-3], n¼17; Median[Interquartile Range];p<0.05). (2) Flow cytometry
showed that more EPCs are sequestered by the placenta in normal
pregnancy than in IUGR (CAC:8.4x10-2[4.6x10-2-1.3x10-1];n¼12 vs.
9.7x10-4[-6.0x10-2-5.5x10-3];n¼9, ECFC:2.3x10-3[4.6x10-4-4.2x10-3]; n¼17
vs. 0.0[0.0-1.7x10-5];n¼9;p<0.05). In culture, normal ECFCs formed more
colonies (8.1 [4.8-12.2];n¼12 vs.1.0[0.4-3.5]; n¼8;p<0.05) and had longer
population doubling times (1.5[1.0-3.1];n¼9 vs. 3.5[3.1-3.6]n¼7;p,0.05)
than did those from IUGR. Differences in colony forming times were not
signiﬁcant (12[9-16.5];n¼13 vs.8[12.5-21.5]n¼8;p>0.05).
Discussion: These data suggest that EPCs migrate from the fetal circulation
to the placenta, where they may contribute to vessel formation. IUGR is
associated with decreased EPC migration and abnormal behaviour in
culture. These anomalies in the numbers or function of EPCs may
contribute to the pathophysiology of placental development in IUGR.
1
Duda et al, Nat Protoc. 2007; 2:805.
2
Lin Y et al, J Clin Invest. 2000;105:71.
3
Mead et al, Curr Prot Stem C Biol. 2008; 2C.1.1-2C1.27
Keywords: Fetal Endothelial Progenitor Cell, Placental Angiogenesis,
Intrauterine Growth Restriction

Objective - Maternal cigarette smoking is associated with intrauterine
growth restriction (IUGR) and placental abnormalities by incompletely
understood mechanisms. Benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), a major component of
cigarette smoke, is embryotoxic. Our objective is to investigate the growth
and cytotoxic responses of JEG3, a human trophoblast-like choriocarcinoma cell line, to B[a]P.
Methods - 5x104 JEG3 cells were exposed to 0.0, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0 and 40.0mM B
[a]P for 5 days in 5 separate experiments. The effect of B[a]P on cell growth
was evaluated using MTT cell proliferation assay, and acridine orange and
TUNEL assays for apoptosis. To investigate the cellular pathways modulated by B[a]P, we determined the activities of total and activated ERK
mitogen activated protein kinase (ERK-MAPK), cyclin D1 a cell cycle
regulating protein and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) by
Western blot analysis. We then performed micro-array analysis of cRNA
from control and treated JEG3 cells to ascertain if exposure to B[a]P is
associated with alterations in expression of genes relevant to cell
proliferation.
Results – Exposure to 0.1mM, B[a]P caused a modest but signiﬁcant
increase in proliferation of JEG3 cells, an increased activity of cyclin D1,
enhanced activation of ERK-MAPK and increased phosphorylation of EGFR.
Exposure to 0.1mM B[a]P also caused a modest increase in expression of
genes that regulate cell proliferation including the cyclins and MAPKs.
Exposure to 10.0 or 40.0mM B[a]P was associated with a 20-25% increase in
apoptosis.
Conclusion - Exposure of JEG3 cells to low concentrations of B[a]P is
associated with enhanced cell proliferation through increased activity of
cell growth associated proteins. This may partly explain the trophoblast
hyperplasia often observed in placental villi of smoking mothers. Such
proliferation may interfere with the syncytial nature of the trophoblast
epithelium, increase the thickness of the villous epithelium and interfere
with transplacental transport, which may contribute to IUGR.
Keywords: Benzo[a]pyrene, JEG3, Proliferation, Apoptosis

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.41]
ALTERED PLACENTAL EXPRESSION OF PAPPA2 DOES NOT AFFECT BIRTH
WEIGHT IN MICE

A.37

[P1.42]
PLACENTAL GROWTH RESTRICTION INDUCED BY DEXAMETHASONE
(DEX) TREATMENT OF PREGNANT MICE IS NOT TRANSMITTED TRANSGENERATIONALLY BY THEIR MALE OFFSPRING

P.K. Wagner, J.K. Christians*, Simon Fraser University, Canada
Introduction: Pregnancy-associated plasma protein A2 (PAPPA2) is an
insulin-like growth factor binding protein (IGFBP) protease expressed in
the placenta and upregulated in pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia. The mechanism linking PAPPA2 expression and pre-eclampsia,
and the consequences of altered PAPPA2 expression, remain unknown. We
previously identiﬁed PAPPA2 as a candidate gene for a quantitative trait
locus (QTL) affecting growth in mice and in the present study examined
whether this QTL affects placental PAPPA2 expression and placental or
embryonic growth.
Methods: Using a line of mice that are genetically homogenous apart from
a 1 megabase QTL region containing the PAPPA2 gene, we bred mice
homozygous for alternate QTL genotypes and collected and weighed
placentae and embryos at E12.5. We used quantitative RT-PCR to measure
the mRNA levels of PAPPA2, as well as mRNA levels of IGFBP-5 (PAPPA2’s
substrate), and PAPPA (a closely related IGFBP protease) to examine
potential feedback and compensation effects. Western blotting was used to
quantify PAPPA2 protein. Birth weight was measured in pregnancies
allowed to proceed to parturition.
Results: PAPPA2 mRNA and protein expression levels in the placenta
differed by a factor of 2.5 between genotypes, but we did not ﬁnd
a signiﬁcant difference between genotypes in embryonic PAPPA2 mRNA
levels. Placental IGFBP-5 and PAPPA expression levels were not altered in
response to PAPPA2 levels. The observed difference in placental PAPPA2
expression had no signiﬁcant effect on placental or embryonic mass at
mid-gestation, birth weight or litter size.
Discussion: Despite a signiﬁcant difference between genotypes in
placental PAPPA2 expression similar in magnitude to the difference
between pre-eclamptic and normal placentae previously reported, we
observed no difference in embryonic, placental or birth weight. Our results
suggest that elevated PAPPA2 levels are a consequence, rather than a cause,
of pregnancy complications.
Keywords: PAPPA2, pregnancy associated plasma protein, pappalysin,
insulin-like growth factor binding protein

OR Vaughan*, AN Sferruzzi-Perri, AL Fowden, University of Cambridge,
United Kingdom
Introduction: Placental size is a major determinant of fetal growth, which,
in turn, affects postnatal phenotype, whether it affects placental phenotype in the next generation remains unknown. Here, we examine the
consequences for F2 placentas of reducing F1 placental and fetal size by
giving F0 dams DEX in mid- and late-pregnancy.
Methods: Pregnant C57BL6/J mice were given DEX (200ng/g daily, s.c.)
from days (D) 11-15 (MID, maximal placental growth) or D14-18 (LATE,
maximal fetal growth, term¼D20.5). Controls were untreated. Postnatal
fractional growth rate (FGR) was monitored after culling litters to 4. At 4
months, F1 males were mated with virgin females to produce an F2
generation. Placental and fetal weights were measured at D19 (n¼7-19
litters) in both generations after euthanasia. Five month-old F1 males
received a glucose tolerance test (GTT, 1g/kg i.p.) after 15h fasting. Differences between treatments were determined by univariate GLM with litter
size as a covariate or one-way ANOVA and considered signiﬁcant when
P<0.05.
Results (Table)
F1 placental and fetal weights were signiﬁcantly less in dex treated than
control groups. Relative to controls, MID DEX F1 pups grew slower prior to
weaning but faster afterwards, with intermediate values in the LATE DEX
group. Offspring glucose tolerance differed with F0 treatment, with lower
basal and maximum increments in blood glucose in LATE DEX males. There
were no signiﬁcant differences in F2 placental or fetal weights with F0
treatment at either D16 or D19.
Discussion: These results demonstrate that there is no paternal transgenerational inheritance of F1 feto-placental growth restriction induced by
F0 DEX treatment. Furthermore, the F1 male phenotypic outcome of
DEX-induced intrauterine growth restriction is more pronounced when
treatment is given during the period of maximal placental growth.
Table: Mean SEM fetal and placental weights (n¼7-19 litters) and F1
male FGR (n¼5-25) in control, MID DEX and LATE DEX groups. a,b denote
signiﬁcant difference.

F1 conceptus
weight (mg)
F1 FGR
(g/g/week)

F2 conceptus
weight (mg)

D19 placenta
D19 fetus
Suckling
0-3weeks
Weaning
3-6 weeks
D19 placenta
D19 fetus

Control

EARLY DEX

LATE DEX

882a
116516a
2.080.07a

792b
111016b
1.770.05b

792b
111118b
1.960.05ab

3.800.17a

4.660.16b

4.500.29ab

821a
121317a

831a
121521a

821a
125618a

Keywords: glucocorticoids, mouse, transgenerational programming, IUGR

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.38

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.43]
DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSION OF PLACENTAL ENDOTHELIAL CELLSPECIFIC HOMEOBOX GENE HEX IS ASSOCIATED WITH ABNORMAL
ANGIOGENESIS IN FETAL GROWTH RESTRICTION AND PRE-ECLAMPSIA
P Murthi*1,2, G Rajaraman3, NA Pathirage1,2, RJ Keogh1,2, J Badet4,5,
N Gude1,2 et al, 1University of Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Australia, 2Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy
Research Centre, Royal Women's Hospital, Australia, 3Monash University
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology and Monash Institute of
Medical Research, Australia, 4Université Paris Descartes, France, 5INSERM,
UMR-S 767, France
Abnormal angiogenesis, particularly in the villous microvasculature, is
frequently associated with fetal growth restriction (FGR) and preeclampsia (PE) (1). In the placenta, angiogenesis is regulated by homeobox
gene transcription factors. HEX is a negative regulator of endothelial cell
function in cardiovascular development (2). Here, we hypothesised that
HEX expression is altered in idiopathic FGR and in PE. Placentae were
collected from idiopathic FGR or PE and from gestation age-matched
controls (GMC). The level of HEX mRNA was determined using real-time
PCR as described previously (3). Relative quantitation of HEX mRNA
normalized to GAPDH revealed HEX expression was increased in FGR
compared with GMC [1.38 0.27, FGR (n¼25) vs. 1.080.21, control (n¼25),
t-test, p<0.05] and decreased in PE compared with GMC [0.84 0.04, PE
(n¼25) vs. 1.080.21, control (n¼25), t-test, p<0.05]. Functional role of
HEX was determined using human placental microvascular endothelial
cells (HPEC) and three independent siRNAs (si) designated as si1, si 2 and si
3. The loss of HEX mRNA was conﬁrmed by real-time PCR [1.0  0.57,
control vs 0.3  0.16, si1; 0.4  0.22, si2; and 0.3  0.17, si3, (n¼3), t-test,
p<0.05]. Following HEX inactivation, the rate of migration of HPEC showed
a signiﬁcantly lower number of migrated cells in si treated HPEC compared
with controls [6  2, (si1); 6  3, (si2); 7  0.5, (si3) vs 52  5 control
(n¼3), t-test, p<0.01]. Proliferation of HPEC demonstrated a signiﬁcantly
decreased rate of proliferation in si treated HPEC compared with controls
[3016  327, (si1); 3159  290, (si2); 2500  130, (si3), vs 7522  402,
control, (n¼3), t-test, p<0.001]. Our study suggests that the altered
expression of HEX may contribute to the abnormal non-branching and
branching angiogenesis observed in FGR and PE, respectively.
1. Kingdom et al. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2000;92(1):35-43.
2. Nakagawa et al. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2003;23(2):231-7.
3. Murthi et al. Am J Pathol. 2006 168(2):511-8.
Keywords: placental angiogenesis, gene expression, fetal growth restriction, pre-eclampsia

[P1.44]
DOWN-REGULATION OF STARD7 BY RNA INTERFERENCE INCREASES
b-HCG PRODUCTION AND SECRETION IN JEG-3 CELLS
J Flores-Martin*, V Rena, ME Ridano, GM Panzetta-Dutari, S GentiRaimondi, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas. UNC. CIBICI-CONICET, Argentina
StarD7 is a member of the START-domain protein family whose function
remains poorly deﬁned. We have recently reported that StarD7 is partially
relocated from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane during in vitro
cytotrophoblast differentiation into syncytiotrophoblast. Furthermore, we
have shown that ß-catenin activates human StarD7 expression through
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Herein, to explore its function in JEG-3 cells
StarD7 expression was down-regulated by siRNA. Silencing of StarD7
expression, conﬁrmed by qRT-PCR and western blot, led to a marked
decrease of ß-catenin, Cnx43, iNOS, MBD2, ABCG2 and TGFbRII mRNA
levels, all of them associated with Wnt signalling. In contrast, expression of
syncytial formation markers, such as b-hCG protein production and
secretion, as well as b-hCG mRNA levels, was increased by StarD7 siRNA. In
addition, ﬂuorescent microscopy performed by immunostaining for
desmoplakin suggested that there was a reduction of intercellular
desmosomes between adjacent JEG-3 cells after knocking-down StarD7
expression.
Whether this response is unique to this cell line is being currently investigating using other models such as BeWo and primary trophoblast cells.
These ﬁndings indicate that the inhibition of StarD7 transcript level alters
the expression of several critical genes suggesting that it may play a role in
placental development.
Supported by CONICET, FONCy, MinCyT of Córdoba and SECyT-UNC
Keywords: StarD7, hCG production, JEG-3 cells, siRNA
[P1.45]
CONVERGENCE OF b-CATENIN SIGNALING AND SF-1 TRANSCRIPTION
FACTOR ON STARD7 GENE PROMOTER
V Rena, J Flores-Martín*, S Angeletti, GM Panzetta-Dutari, S GentiRaimondi, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas. UNC. CIBICI-CONICET, Argentina
StarD7 belongs to the START-domain proteins that are involved in intracellular transport and lipid metabolism. StarD7 was ﬁrst identiﬁed
over-expressed in JEG-3 cells compared to normal and benign trophoblastic samples. We previously reported that StarD7 expression was
independently regulated by b-catenin signaling and SF-1 factor at the
transcriptional level. Herein, a possible convergence between both activating factors was investigated. To evaluate this hypothesis, JEG-3 cells
were co-transfected with the SF-1 or/and the constitutively active bcatenin S33Y expression plasmids, together with the -938/+157 StarD7
promoter construct, which contains the SF-1 and TCF consensus binding
sites recognized by each protein. In addition, co-transfection assays were
performed using these protein expression plasmids and mutated promoter
versions in the SF-1 and TCF consensus sites (-938/+157mut SF1-1 and
-938/+157mut SF1-1/mut TCF).
The results of this work show that SF-1 and b-catenin synergically activate
StarD7 promoter. Moreover, these ﬁndings indicate that the TCF site
localized at -614/-608 bp plays an important role in this activation.
Furthermore, deletion of the 235-238 amino acids in the SF-1 transcription
factor, involved in the b-catenin physical interaction, abolished this transcriptional activation; demonstrating that the interaction between the two
proteins is necessary for an efﬁcient StarD7 transcriptional activation.
Finally, these data suggest that b-catenin could function as a bridge
between SF-1 and TCF forming a ternary complex, which would transcriptionally activate StarD7 gene.
Supported by CONICET, FONCyT, MinCyT of Córdoba and SECyT-UNC
Keywords: Wnt signaling, SF-1 transcription factor, StarD7, JEG-3 cells

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.39

[P1.46]
REGULATION OF PLACENTAL LEPTIN EXPRESSION BY ESTRADIOL
INVOLVES GENOMIC AND NONGENOMIC ACTIONS

[P1.47]
ROLE OF ET-1 IN THE INDUCTION OF PLACENTAL ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM STRESS IN PREGNANCY DISORDERS

Y.P. Gambino*1, A. Pérez-Pérez2, J.C. Calvo1,3, V. Sánchez-Margalet2, C.L.
Varone1, 1Dpto. de Química Biológica, FCEN, UBA, Argentina, 2Dpto. de
Bioquímica Médica y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Sevilla, Spain,
3
IByME, Buenos Aires, Argentina

A. Jain*, H. Yung, G.J. Burton, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

Leptin is a cytokine-type hormone that controls the functional integrity of
feto-placental unit, thereby maintaining pregnancy. Leptin is secreted by
placenta, where it plays an autocrine trophic role. However, the regulation
of leptin production in the placenta is still poorly understood. In the
present study, we analyzed the effect of 17beta-estradiol (E2) on leptin
expression in human placental cells.
Methods: BeWo choriocarcinoma cells and human placental explants
were used. Western blot analyses were carried out to detect leptin
expression as well as the phosphorylated form of proteins involved in
different signaling pathways. qPCRs were performed to analyze leptin
mRNA levels. Transfection assays with reporter constructs and expression
vectors were used to determine transcriptional regulation of leptin.
Results: We have found that leptin expression was increased in both BeWo
cells and placental explants, evidencing physiological relevance. Maximal
effect was achieved at 100 nM E2 in BeWo cells, and was blocked with 10
nM ICI 182,780. The incubation with E2 also enhanced leptin promoter
activity. The overexpression of ESRalpha, but not of ESRbeta, increased E2
effect on leptin promoter activity. These effects could be partially
explained by membrane ESRs since treatment of cells with E-BSA
increased leptin mRNA and protein. This effect was prevented with ICI
182,780. Moreover, the presence of ESRalpha was detected in membrane
fraction of placental cells. On the other hand, E2 and E-BSA induced MAPK
and PI3K pathways in placental explants. Inhibition of these signaling
pathways with dominant negative mutant kinases or pharmacologic
inhibitors prevents E2 effect on leptin expression.
Conclusions: All these ﬁndings suggest that E2 enhances leptin expression
in human placental cells through genomic and nongenomic actions. These
results provide new evidence of the mechanisms whereby E2 regulate
leptin expression in placenta and conﬁrm the importance of leptin in
placental physiology.
Keywords: Leptin, Placenta, Estradiol

Introduction: Recent evidence implicates placental endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in the pathophysiology of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine
growth restriction (IUGR). The ER is involved in synthesis and packaging of
membrane and secretory proteins, and also serves as a reservoir of Ca2+.
Loss of ER Ca2+ homeostasis suppresses post-translational modiﬁcations
of proteins, triggering ER stress pathways. Endothelin (ET)-1 can induce
Ca2+ release from the ER, and is increased in both IUGR and pre-eclampsia.
This study therefore investigated whether ET-1 can induce ER stress.
Methods: Immunohistochemistry for ET-1 and the ETB receptor was
performed on parafﬁn-embedded villous samples collected with informed
patient consent (25-40 weeks). Human trophoblast-like JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells were treated with different doses of ET-1 for 1 hour with or
without inhibitors. Activation of signalling pathways was assessed by
immunoprecipitation and Western blots.
Results: Immunohistochemistry conﬁrmed the presence of both ET-1 and
the ETB receptor in the syncytiotrophoblast. Immunoreactivity of both was
increased in IUGR and pre-eclamptic samples compared to normal
controls. JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells treated with ET-1 displayed
increased expression of ER stress markers, GRP-78 and GRP-94, in a dosedependent fashion. Immunoprecipitation with anti-phospho-tyrosine
antibody showed that ET-1 induces phospho-activation of the ETB
receptor. That ET-1 acts via the ETB receptor was conﬁrmed by treating
cells with BQ788, an ETB receptor antagonist (Figure), which inhibited the
induction of ER stress. ET-1 also stimulated p-PLC levels, which could be
inhibited by U73122, providing a mechanism by which ET-1 can induce
Ca2+ release from the ER. A third inhibitor, Xestospongin-C, which acts
on the IP3 receptor, also inhibited induction of ER stress by ET-1.
Conclusion: These data show that ET-1 is able to induce ER stress via the
ETB receptor by initiating signalling through the PLC/IP3 pathway. The
results suggest an adverse autocrine action of ET-1 on the syncytiotrophoblast in pathological pregnancies.

Ă

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.40

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.48]
RELAXIN BOOST MAY BE FACILITATED BY FORMATION OF INTRACELLULAR VACUOLES IN LUTEAL CELL OF THE PORCINE OVARY: AN IMMUNOCYTOCHEMISTRY AND TRANSMISSION ELECTRON MICROSCOPY
STUDY
Vibeke Dantzer*, Kerstin Fjällman, LIFE, Copenhagen University, Denmark
Introduction: Relaxin is best known as a reproductive peptide hormone
essential during late pregnancy as it promotes growth and softening of the
uterine cervix, thereby ensuring rapid and safe delivery and secondly it
also promotes growth and development of the mammary apparatus. New
physiological functions for this hormone in implantation, vascularization
and placentation is emerging, but with great diversity in the physiology
and biological effect among species. In the pig the the corpus luteae
synthesize this hormone early in gestation with a progressive increase
from day 20 to reach a peak at late gestation and then a markedly decline
at the onset of parturition. The pattern of accumulation in luteal cells
ensuring the boost was the topic for this investigation.
Methods: Corpus luteum (2-3 per stage) from13 stages were investigated,
5 stages (day 33-95) were ﬁxed in glutaraldehyde and processed for
electron microscopy (TEM) and 8 (day 55-90 and one nonpregnant in early
luteal phase) were ﬁxed in Bouins ﬁxative for immunocytohemistry using
a polyclonal relaxin antibody (Immunediagnostic) both by rutine laboratory methods. All controls were negative.
Results and discussion: In the nonpregnant a very weak reaction was
shown, and no apparent vacuoles were seen. Cellular vacuoles increased in
number per ﬁeld to day 95. The Relaxin reaction often surrounded these
vacuoles and in 10mm sections reaction products were also seen in the
lumen of the vacuoles. By TEM the vacuoles varied in size from 1,2mm to
25mm and shape – round, oval or irregular and electron dense granules and
their products seen in the lumen. A basal lamina surrounded all lutein
cells, but were never seen lining the vacuoles. The lutein cell wall arround
parts of the vacuoles were very thin, 0.1mm, often seen close to capillaries.
Conclusion: The vacuoles are storing relaxin facilitating fast and important boost prior to parturition.
Keywords: relaxin, ovary, preparturition effect

[P1.49]
LEPTIN ENHANCES CELL PROLIFERATION AND SURVIVAL IN PLACENTAL
CELLS
F Ibarbalz, J Maymó, Y Gambino, B Maskin, JC Calvo, C Varone*, 1Departamento
de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad
de Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Hospital Alejandro Posadas, Argentina
Fetal-maternal dialogue during implantation involves multiple regulators
such as leptin. This 16KD protein plays diverse roles in placental growth
and survival.
Previous results from our group demonstrated that leptin increases cell
proliferation and survival in JEG-3 and BeWo cells. We also demonstrated
that leptin expression is tightly regulated by different placental regulators.
The aim of the present work is to study the mechanisms involved in
placental proliferation and apoptosis.
Methods: BeWo and Swan cells, and human term placental explants were
used. Western blot analyses were carried out to detect leptin, Bcl-2, Bax
and p53 expression. Cell proliferation was determined by cell counting and
3H-thymidine incorporation. Transfection assays with reporter constructs
were used to determine leptin effect on different transduction pathways.
Results: Leptin treatment in Swan cells increased cell proliferation up to 3
times. Maximal effect was achieved with 100 ng leptin/ml at two days of
incubation. Caspase-3 activation was determined by Western blot. Leptin
diminished the proteolysis of caspase-3 in a dose dependent manner.
Moreover the diminution in endogenous leptin by treatment with an
antisense oligonucleotide (2-4 mM) increases cellular apoptosis measured
by caspase-3 activation. Bcl-2 and Bax levels were determined after leptin
treatment and the relationship between them calculated. The expression
of the key cell cycle regulator p53 was also determined. Slightly changes
were observed
Conclusions: All these results reinforce the notion of leptin as a placental
cytokine with the function of promoting growth and survival of placental
cells.
Keywords: leptin, placenta, proliferation, apoptosis

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.41

[P1.50]
LOCALIZATION OF MIF RECEPTORS AT THE MATERNAL-PLACENTAL
INTERFACE IN MICE

[P1.51]
DIFFUSIVE OXYGEN FLUXES TO CAPILLARIES WITHIN THE HUMAN
PLACENTA

M.F. Martucci*1, M.R. Faria1, L. Paulesu2, E. Bevilacqua1, 1University of Sao
Paulo, Brazil, 2University of Siena, Italy

JS Gill*1, DS Grebenkov2, CM Salaﬁa3, D Vvedensky1, 1Imperial College,
United Kingdom, 2Ecole Polytechnique, France, 3Placental Analytics LLC,
United States

Maternal-fetal interaction is crucial to the pregnancy success and involves
molecular dialogues between regulatory factors. One of these molecules is
the Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor (MIF), a pro-inﬂammatory
cytokine released by activated leukocytes and immune-competent cells.
MIF is expressed during pregnancy, particularly by trophoblast cells, in
different species. The intracellular MIF signaling pathway is triggered by
binding to the membrane receptor CD74 and phosphorylation of CD44
resulting in an effective intracellular kinase response and induction of
MIF-dependent gene expression. Objective: Knowing the target cells to
MIF at the maternal-fetal interface to facilitate the understanding of the
downstream cascade and roles played by this factor during pregnancy.
Material and Methods: Immunolocalization and gene expression of MIF
receptors at implantation sites and placentas of females at gestation days
7.5, 9.5, 13.5 and 17.5. Results: The immunoreactivity for CD74 and CD44
antibodies was observed in decidua and leukocytes in all gestation days
studied. At gd 10.5, 13.5 and 17.5 trophoblast giant cells and endotheliallike cells were also reactive for CD74. The immunolocalization of CD44 was
showed in decidual cells and trophoblast giant cells on 10.5, 13.5 and 17.5
gd. Endothelial-like cells were reactive only on gd 13.5 and 17.5. The Mif
mRNA expression for both receptors was found during all gestational
periods in the decidua, peaking on gd 10.5. In trophoblast and fetal
placental compartment relevant expression were seen only for CD74,
exclusively on gd10.5. In conclusion, the expression of both MIF receptors
in decidual cells associated with previous results showing MIF expression
by trophoblast cells, suggest a paracrine mechanism. Studies to determine
the functions associated to this putative dialogue at the maternal-placental
interface are now in progress in our laboratory.
Financial support: CNPq.
Keywords: MIF, CD74, CD44, Placenta

Goal/Background: The mature placenta has a complex vascular network
extending to the capillary beds of the terminal villi, the sites of all oxygen
and nutrient exchange between the mother and fetus. Respiratory transfer
across the placenta to the fetus occurs in three steps: (i) maternal blood
bathes the chorionic villi in oxygen, (ii) oxygen permeates the villus
surface and diffuses into the fetal capillaries, and (iii) oxygen is transported
to the fetus by fetal blood.
Materials/Methods: Step (ii) has been modelled as oxygen diffusion from
the villous membrane to the fetal capillaries. The stationary oxygen
concentration c(x,t) within each villus is the solution of Laplace's equation
in two dimensions, cxx+cyy ¼ 0, with a ﬁxed value at the villous surface
and a Robin boundary condition at the capillary boundary: Dvc/vn ¼ Kc,
where v/vn is outward normal derivative, D is the oxygen diffusion
constant and K is the permeability of the capillary. These equations are
solved within regions between the villi and capillary boundaries obtained
from digitized images.
Results: The diffusive current of oxygen across the capillaries is inﬂuenced
by many factors, including the shapes of villi and the number and spatial
arrangement of the capillaries. Distributions of oxygen transport characteristics determined from our calculations reveal systematic trends and
reveal the effect of certain complications. Panel (a) shows the capillary ﬂux
per unit area for all calculations, with a breakdown of the distribution and
percentages [panel(b)] into normal placentas and those with pre-existing
and pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH). The ﬂuxes of PIH Placentas are
skewed toward lower values, which is qualitatively different from the
other placentas.
Conclusions: The statistics of oxygen transport characteristics within
capillaries of the human placenta are capable of identifying certain
abnormalities. Further work should clarify the extent to which this can be
generalized to other conditions.

ĂKeywords: Oxygen diffusion, placental function, villous capillary

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.42

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.52]
IDENTIFICATION OF CHEMOKINE EXPRESSION PROFILES IN CHORIODECIDUA FROM WOMEN IN PRETERM AND TERM LABOUR
SA Hamilton, CL Tower, RL Jones*, University of Manchester, United
Kingdom
Introduction: Current therapies for preterm labour (PTL) focus on
arresting myometrial contractions. These are not effective therefore
alternative therapeutic targets need to be identiﬁed. Leukocytes inﬁltrate
the gestational tissues during labour and have been implicated in these
processes. We hypothesize that chemokines mediate leukocyte recruitment in PTL and term labour (TL), and therefore are potential targets for
preventing PTL.
Methods: Women were recruited into 4 study groups: TL, term not in
labour (TNIL), PTL and PTL with infection (PTLi) (n¼8-10/group). Choriodecidua was collected and RNA extracted. Pooled RNA from the 4 groups
was subjected to a pathway speciﬁc PCR array for chemokines. Differential
expression of candidate genes was validated by real time RT-PCR.
Chemokine proteins were localised in fetal membranes using
immunohistochemistry.
Results: 25 chemokines were upregulated (2-120 fold change) in choriodecidua from TL compared to TNIL. A similar pattern was detected in PTL,
with 18 of the same chemokines upregulated (2-51 fold change) and 2
chemokines downregulated. However a distinct cohort of chemokines was
expressed in PTLi, with 14 genes differentially expressed between PTL and
PTLi. 10 genes were selected for further study: CCL2, CCL4, CCL5, CCL8,
CCL18, CXCL1, CXCL8, CXCL9, CXCL10, CX3CL1. The same expression
patterns were observed by real time PCR on both pooled and individual
samples. Most chemokines were expressed by both chorion and decidua,
localised to decidual stromal cells, chorion trophoblast and inﬁltrating
leukocytes.
Discussion: These data provide compelling evidence that chemokines
regulate choriodecidual leukocyte recruitment during labour. The similarities between chemokine proﬁles in TL and PTL suggest the same
processes are occurring, but are triggered precociously. Distinct chemokine proﬁles in PTL and PTLi is consistent with differences in leukocyte
subpopulations present and conﬁrm different aetiologies. Chemokines
may represent novel therapeutic targets to prevent PTL.
Keywords: Chemokines, Leukocytes, Decidua, Fetal Membranes

[P1.53]
IMPLICATION OF ORAL BACTERIA IN PLACENTAL INFECTIONS
Y Fardini1, P Chung1, R Dumm3, N Joshi1, RW Redline2, YW Han*1,2,
Department of Periodontics, School of Dental Medicine, Case Western
Reserve University, United States, 2Department of Pathology, School of
Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, United States, 3Hathaway
Brown School, United States
1

Intrauterine infection is a leading cause of adverse pregnancy outcome
ranging from preterm birth to stillbirth. The current paradigm indicates
that intrauterine infection predominantly originates from the vaginal tract,
with the organisms ascending into the otherwise sterile uterus. With the
improvement in technology, an increasing number of microorganisms
have been identiﬁed in intrauterine infection that do not belong to the
vaginal microbiome. Studies in both humans and animals have demonstrated that intrauterine infection can originate from the oral cavity
following hematogenous transmission. We have recently reported a case of
human term stillbirth in which the same Fusoabcterium clone that killed
the fetus was found in the mother's oral ﬂora but not in her vaginal or
rectal ﬂoras. Our animal studies have demonstrated that oral Fusobacterium causes fetal death by stimulating TLR4-mediated placental inﬂammatory responses, a mechanism which can be shared by other organisms.
Thus, we began to systemically address what proportion of the oral
microbiome can translocate to the placenta and cause infection. Pooled
saliva and subgingival plaque samples were injected into pregnant mice
through tail veins to mimic bacteremia, which occurs frequently during
periodontal infection. The organisms colonizing the murine placenta were
detected using 16S rRNA-based PCR and clone analysis. A diverse group of
organisms were identiﬁed, including Aggregatibacter, Campylobacter,
Capnocytophaga, Eikenella, Erysipelothrix, Fusobacterium, Gemella, Granulicatella, Leptotrichia, Microbacterium, Neisseria, Parvimonas, Peptostreptococcus, Prevotella, Porphyromonas, Streptococcus, Selemonas, TM7
phylum, and Veillonella. Interestingly, many of them have been associated
with adverse pregnancy outcome in humans although their sources of
infection were not determined. The majority of these species were oral
commensal organisms. This may be due to a dose effect but may also
indicate the role of commensal organisms in intrauterine infection. A
number of species were selectively “enriched” during the translocation
with a higher prevalence in the placenta than in the pooled saliva or
subgingival plaque samples. These observations indicate that the placental
translocation was species speciﬁc. This study provides the ﬁrst insight into
the diversity of oral bacteria which may be involved in intrauterine
infection. Oral bacteria play a previously unrecognized role in placental
infections.
Keywords: oral bacteria, placenta, inﬂammation, colonization

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.54]
MONOCHORIONIC TWIN PREGNANCY IN SPONTANEOUS AND ASSISTED
REPRODUCTION: A FAVORABLE OUTCOME
Silvia Visentin*1, Erich Cosmi1, Stefania Vedovato2, Francesco Cavallin1,
Daniele Trevisanuto2, Vincenzo Zanardo2 et al, 1Department of Gynecological Science and Human Reproduction, Padua University, Italy,
2
Pediatrics Department, Padua University, Italy
Introduction: to assess obstetric complications and neonatal outcome in
spontaneous and by assisted reproductive technology (ART) monochorionic twin pregnancies.
Methods: Obstetrical data and neonatal outcome of monochorionic twin
pregnancies were retrospectively analyzed between January 2006 and
December. Twin pregnancies were divided into spontaneous, ART and
corionicity. In monochorionic pregnancy biometrical and Doppler data
were performed weekly.
Results: Among the 196 twin pregnancies studied, there was a statistically
signiﬁcant difference between the number of bichorionic (BB) and monochorionic biamniotic (MB) pregnancies (41 patients) as expected.
There were no statistically signiﬁcant differences of gender and frequency
of some obstetric diseases. There was in 10 cases a Twin to Twin Transfusion Syndrome (TTTS) with subsequent death of 4 fetuses for severe
prematurity. In the monochorionic non ART group were observed a case of
diaphragmatic hernia and two with heart disease. In 97.5% of cases was
performed a Caesarean section, in most cases for programming assistance
(41%), TTTS (24%), beginning of labour (17%), IUGR (7.3%) and other reasons
(10.7%), with the same distribution between the groups. There was also
a vaginal delivery a term. The infants were comparable for gestational age
at delivery, birth weight and Apgar at 5 minutes. There was a statistically
difference in incidence of SGA fetuses in utero and at birth. The neonatal
outcome was comparable with the others groups.
Conclusions: monochorionic biamniotic pregnancies do not have an
unfavourable outcome compared to bichorionic biamniotic pregnancies in
terms of maternal and neonatal morbidity.
Keywords: spontaneous twin pregnancies, twin pregnancy in assisted
reproduction, neonatal outcome, management

A.43

[P1.56]
HYPOXIA INDUCES THE RELEASE OF SFLT-1 AND SENDOGLIN FROM
CHORIONIC VILLI VIA A HIF-1-DEPENDENT MECHANISM THAT IS REGULATED BY THE NO MIMETIC GLYCERYL TRINITRATE
IB Barsoum*, SJ Renaud, CH Graham, Queen's University, Canada
There is evidence that placental anti-angiogenic factors such as soluble
fms-related tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) and soluble Endoglin (sEndoglin)
induce systemic maternal endothelial dysfunction thereby contributing to
the pathophysiology of pre-eclampsia. Studies have shown that the release
of these molecules by the placenta is due to hypoxia resulting from
inadequate perfusion. We previously demonstrated that the nitric oxide
(NO) mimetic glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) inhibits hypoxia/re-oxygenation
(H/R)-mediated apoptosis in the syncytiotrophoblast of chorionic villi
explants from term pregnancies. This study sought to determine whether
treatment with GTN inhibits the release of sFlt-1 and sEndoglin from
chorionic villi exposed to hypoxia. Results showed that the syncytiotrophoblast is a potential source of sFlt-1 and sEndoglin. Whereas
exposure to hypoxia (0.5% O2 vs. 20% O2 for 24 h) increased the secretion
of sFlt-1 and sEndoglin, as well as their expression at both the protein and
mRNA levels, treatment with GTN (10 nM and 1 mM) signiﬁcantly attenuated this response to hypoxia. Treatment with GTN also decreased the
levels of HIF-1a protein in explants exposed to 20% or to 0.5% O2. Additionally, siRNA-mediated knockdown of HIF-1a inhibited the hypoxiainduced secretion of sFlt-1 and sEndoglin. These ﬁndings reveal that
hypoxia induces the release of sFlt-1 and sEndoglin from chorionic villi via
a HIF-1-dependent mechanism that is regulated by the NO mimetic GTN.
The study provides support for the use of GTN as potential therapy for preeclampsia. (Supported by the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Ontario).
Keywords: sFlt-1, sEndoglin, Hypoxia, glyceryl trinitrate

[P1.55]
ADIPONECTIN IN FIRST TRIMESTER OF PREGNANCIES THAT LATER
DEVELOP PREECLAMPSIA: RELATION TO PROGNOSIS AND ADIPOKINES
M. Christiansen*1, P.L. Hedley1,2, S. Placing1, K.R. Wøjdemann3, A-C. Shalmi3,
L. Rode3 et al, 1Statens Serum Institut, Denmark, 2University of Stellenbocsh, South Africa, 3Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet,
Denmark
Background: Adiponectin is a major insulin sensitizing adipocytokine. In
pregnancy, elevated as well as reduced concentrations of adiponectin have
been reported in serum from pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia.
We assessed whether serum adiponectin was a ﬁrst trimester screening
marker of PE and explored the relation to clinical course of PE as well as the
relation to other adipokines in maternal serum.
Design, Setting & Patients: Case control study with ﬁrst trimester,
gestational week 10+3 – 13+6, serum samples from the Copenhagen First
Screening Trimester Study. There were 123 pregnancies that developed PE
and 285 control pregnancies.
Results: The maternal serum adiponectin concentration was signiﬁcantly
reduced in pregnancies that later developed PE, median 3.8 ug/mL (range:
1.6 – 10.2 ug/mL) compared to controls, median 4.5 ug/mL (range: 1.4 –
17.3 ug/mL) (p < 0.001). There was no signiﬁcant correlation between the
adiponectin level and clinical severity of PE, parity, gestational age or birth
weight. Adiponectin dicrimnated signiﬁcantly, albeit poorly, between PE
and control pregnancies. No correlation was found between maternal
weight corrected adiponectin and neither TNFa nor free leptin index.
Conclusions: Maternal serum adiponectin is decreased a ﬁrst trimester of
pregnancies that develop PE. This may reﬂect a metabolic disturbance
predisposing to or causing PE.
Keywords: adipokines, adiponectin, ﬁrst trimester, metabolism

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.44

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.57]
DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSION OF VE-CADHERIN AND FLK-1 IN THE SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST OF PREECLAMPTIC PLACENTAS COMPARED TO
HEALTHY CONTROLS

[P1.58]
PHAGOCYTOSIS OF APOPTOTIC SYNCYTIAL KNOTS PREVENTS ENDOTHELIAL CELL ACTIVATION: AN IMPORTANT ADAPTATION FOR NORMAL
PREGNANCY

T Groten*1, F Reister2, E Schleußner1, B Huppertz3, 1Department of
Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Friedrich-Schiller University Jena,
Germany, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Ulm,
Germany, 3Institute of Cell Biology, Histology & Embryology, Medical
University of Graz, Austria

Qi Chen*1,2, Bonnia Liu1, Hongyan Jin2, Peter Stone1, Larry Chamley1, 1The
University of Auckland, New Zealand, 2Fudan University, China

Introduction: VE-cadherin is promoting intercellular adhesion of endothelial cells thereby regulating endothelial integrity and permeability.
Moreover, VE-cadherin is involved in the regulation of Flk-1 receptor
activity and thus cell cycle regulation. Preeclampsia has been associated
with impaired syncytial function and altered trophoblast turnover.
Therefore we investigated whether altered VE-cadherin and Flk-1
expression might be associated with preeclampsia.
Methods: Biopsies of placentas from 19 patients with late onset
preeclampsia and 24 healthy term deliveries as well as 20 cases of early
onset preeclampsia and 20 preterm controls were stained for VE-cadherin
and Flk-1.
Results: All biopsies showed VE-cadherin and Flk-1 expression in
placental vessels and in the syncytiotrophoblast. VE-cadherin expression
in the syncytiotrophoblast was signiﬁcantly higher in late onset
preeclamptic cases and ﬂk-1 expression was less pronounced compared to
term controls. Whereas in early onset preeclampsia VE-cadherin was
signiﬁcantly less and ﬂk-1 signiﬁcantly more expressed compared to
preterm controls.
Conclusion: Differential expression of VE-cadherin and Flk-1 might
contribute to the etiopathologic events at the fetomaternal interface in
preeclampsia. Since reduction of VE-cadherin and increase of ﬂk-1could
lead to pronounced cell activation in the syncytiotrophoblast these
changes than would enhance necrotic shedding instead of apoptotic
shedding. The syncytial material released into the maternal system on
necrotic shedding is believed to cause the maternal syndrome of
preeclampsia. Thus overexpression of VE-cadherin and downregulation of
ﬂk-1 would represent a more stable situation in the syncytiotrophoblast
and could possibly display a compensatory mechanism in the late onset
cases.
Keywords: Preeclampsia, syncytiotrophoblast, VEGFR2/ﬂk-1, VE-cadherin

Background: Preeclampsia is characterised by an exaggerated inﬂammatory response and maternal endothelial cell activation. Syncytial knots are
multinucleated fetal cells shed from the placenta in large numbers during
all pregnancies which may be phagocytosed by endothelial cells. Our
previous studies showed that phagocytosis of necrotic but not apoptotic
syncytial knots led to endothelial cell activation. It is known that phagocytosis of apoptotic cells leads to active tolerance of immune responses
and in this study we questioned whether phagocytosis of apoptotic
syncytial knots leads to suppression of the endothelial cells ability to be
activated.
Methods: Syncytial knots were harvested from 1st trimester placental
explants. Monolayers of endothelial cells were pre-treated with apoptotic
syncytial knots for 24 hours. After washing, the endothelial cells were
treated with the endothelial cell activators LPS, PMA, IL-6, or necrotic
syncytial knots for 24 hours. In some experiments the inhibitor of
phagocytosis, cytochalasin D, was added into the cultures along with
apoptotic syncytial knots. Endothelial cell-surface ICAM-1 was measured
using cell based ELISAs.
Results: Expression of ICAM-1 by endothelial cells that had phagocytosed
apoptotic syncytial knots prior to treatment with LPS, PMA, IL-6, or
necrotic syncytial knots was signiﬁcantly (p¼/<0.003) reduced, compared
to control endothelial cells that had not phagocytosed apoptotic syncytial
knots. Inhibiting phagocytosis of apoptotic syncytial knots with cytochalasin D abolished this protective effect.
Conclusions: Our data suggest phagocytosis of apoptotic syncytial knots
results in the suppression of the ability of endothelial cells to be activated
by a number of potent chemical activators, as well as by the physiologically
relevant activator, necrotic syncytial knots. This work suggests that the
release of apoptotic syncytial knots from the placenta during normal
pregnancy may be a mechanism by which the fetus attempts to protect the
maternal vasculature against activation.
Keywords: phagocytosis, trophoblast deportation, endothelium activation

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.59]
DO SYNCYTIAL KNOTS UNDERGO SECONDARY NECROSIS?
Qi Chen*1,2, ChuanLing Tang1, Peter Stone2, Larry Chamley2,
University, China, 2The University of Auckland, New Zealand

A.45

[P1.60]
ELEVATED CALRETICULIN IN MATERNAL PLASMA IN PRE-ECLAMPSIA
ALTERS TROPHOBLAST CELL FUNCTION
1

Fudan

Introduction: Preeclampsia is triggered by a factor derived from the
placenta and syncytial knots shed from the placenta may be a triggering
factor. We previously reported that endothelial cells phagocytose syncytial
knots and that phagocytosis of necrotic, but not apoptotic syncytial knots
caused activation of endothelial cells. It is known that increased numbers
of syncytial knots are shed in preeclampsia and it has been suggested this
may overburden the clearance mechanism for syncytial knots allowing
apoptotic syncytial knots to undergo secondary necrosis. Therefore we
investigated whether apoptotic syncytial knots would undergo secondary
necrosis.
Methods: Apoptotic syncytial knots/trophoblasts collected from our 1st
trimester placental explant model were exposed to either monolayers of
endothelial cells or placed into control culture wells with no endothelial
cells. After 24 hours unphagocytosed syncytial knots were recovered and
exposed to additional endothelial cells for 24 hours. Endothelial cell
surface ICAM-1 was determined by ELISA and activity of caspases 3&7 in
the unphagocytosed syncytial knots determined by FLICA observed by
confocal micrscopy.
Results: The activity of caspases 3&7 in unphagocytosed syncytial knots
was apparently reduced compared to freshly shed syncytial knots. The
level of ICAM-1 expression by fresh endothelial cells that were exposed
to “unphagocytosed” syncytial knots that had been previously exposed to
endothelial cells was signiﬁcantly increased (p <0.001) compared to
endothelial cells exposed to freshly shed syncytial knots or control
syncytial knots that had been placed into endothelial cell-free culture
wells.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that if syncytial knots are not rapidly cleared
from the maternal vasculature they can undergo secondary necrosis that is
induced by contact with endothelial cells. This endothelial cell-dependent
induction of secondary necrosis might how an increased burden of
apoptotic syncytial knots might lead to endothelial cell activation in
preeclampsia.
Keywords: trophoblast deportation, apoptosis, necrosis

K.E Crawford*1,2, J.L. Stevenson1, S.P. Brennecke1,2, N.M. Gude1,2, 1Pregnancy Research Centre, Department of Perinatal Medicine, Victoria,
Australia, 2University of Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia
Pre-eclampsia (PE) is a multisystem disorder of human pregnancy that
involves abnormal placentation (insufﬁcient trophoblast cell (TC) invasion
of the maternal spiral arteries). Throughout pregnancy, the endovascular
extravillous TCs are continually exposed to maternal blood. The calciumbinding protein calreticulin is signiﬁcantly increased in peripheral blood in
PE compared to normotensive pregnancy (Gu et al. Molec. Human. Repro.
2008, 14; 309-315). Although calreticulin mRNA has been shown to
increase in human TC with the induction of differentiation (Morrish et al.
Placenta. 1996, 17; 431-441), little is known about the role of extracellular
calreticulin on TC function.
This study determined the effects of exogenous calreticulin at concentrations relevant to normotensive pregnancy (2mg/ml) and to PE (5mg/ml) on
the human extravillous TC cell line, HTR8. Cell migration was measured by
scratch assay, changes in cell number were measured by the MTS assay
(Promega) and cell adhesion measured on different extracellular matrices
(Millipore).
The results showed that calreticulin at 5mg/ml did not stimulate HTR8 cell
number (control 6804424542 cells, with calreticulin 7281030673 cells,
P>0.05, n¼3) after 48 hours but it did signiﬁcantly inhibit migration of the
cells by 4811% (n¼4), compared to the control by 26 hours (t-test
P<0.02). Calreticulin at 5mg/ml did not alter HTR8 adhesion on Collagen I,
Collagen IV, ﬁbronectin, vitronectin or laminin. Calreticulin at the lower
concentration did not alter TC functions.
In conclusion, calreticulin at a concentration consistent with that found in
maternal blood with PE was shown to alter TC migratory activity during in
vitro culture. These results indicate that circulating calreticulin may inhibit
TC migration in vivo and contribute to the mechanisms that generate the
abnormal placental-decidual interface that is the basis of PE.
Keywords: Trophoblast cell function, Calreticulin, Cell migration

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.46

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.61]
PRE-ECLAMPSIA IS ASSOCIATED WITH LOWER ADENOSINE A2A
RECEPTOR RESPONSE IN UMBILICAL VEIN ENDOTHELIAL CELLS
C Escudero*1,2, J Acurio1, A Escudero1, P Bertoglia2, 1Vascular Physiology
Laboratory, Department of Basic Sciences, Universidad del Bío-Bío, Chile,
2
Gynaecology and Obstetric Department, Hospital Clínico Herminda
Martin, Chile
Pre-eclampsia is associated with high adenosine plasma levels in both
maternal and feto-placental circulation. Moreover, adenosine A2A receptor
expression is reduced in placental endothelium from pre-eclampsia. Since,
the angiogenesis process is partially controlled by A2A receptor stimulation in several cellular models; we wonder whether the changes observed
in pre-eclampsia could be associated with reduced proliferation and
migration of fetal endothelium
Methods. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were isolated
by collagenase (0.25 mg/ml) from normal (n¼6) and pre-eclamptic pregnancies (n¼6) and cultured under standard condition (37 C, 5% CO2) up to
passage 2. The experiments were performed after overnight serumdeprivation and cells incubation with and without adenosine A2A receptor
agonist (CGS-21680, 30nM) and/or the antagonist (ZM-241385, 10nM)
during further 48 hours. In proliferation assays; cell number was determined using a hemacytometer and they were seeded at a density of 50 x
103/ml. After treatment cells were counted and proliferating cells were
estimated. In parallel, monolayers of conﬂuent cells were scratched with
a sterile cell scraper, and then cells crossing the wound were counted per
unit time.
Results. Demographic characteristic of pregnant women were similar.
Newborn from pre-eclamptic pregnancies showed reduced birth weight
compared with newborn from normal pregnancies (p<0.05). HUVEC from
pre-eclampsia exhibited lower proliferation (~42%) and migration (~34%)
compared with cells from normal pregnancies. CGS-21680 increased the
proliferation (~2-fold) and migration (~1.5-fold) only in normal pregnancies derived cells. These last effects were blocked by ZM-241385
co-incubation. In addition, ZM-241385 alone reduced cell proliferation
(~15 and 35%) and migration (~25 and 20%) in both pre-eclamptic and
normal derived cells, respectively.
Conclusion. Reduction in fetal endothelium proliferation and migration
observed in pre-eclampsia is associated with lower adenosine A2A
receptor response. These phenomenons coincide with reduced adenosine
A2A receptor expression in placental endothelium from pre-eclampsia and
would be contributing in the reduction of placental angiogenesis and
lower blood ﬂow toward pre-eclamptic fetuses.
Supported by FONDECYT 1100684, DI-UBB 0965091/RS.
Keywords: Adenosine, Adenosine receptors, Fetal Endothelium,
Angiogenesis

[P1.62]
THE ENDOTHELIN / ENDOTHELIN RECEPTOR SYSTEM IS HIGHLY UPREGULATED IN PREECLAMPSIA WITH OR WITHOUT FETAL GROWTH
RESTRICTION IN CONTRAST TO GESTATIONAL DIABETES
M. Dieber-Rotheneder*, M. Fellner, S. Beganovic, G. Desoye, M. CervarZivkovic, Medical University Graz, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Austria
Introduction: In addition to its vasoregulative function, in the human
placenta endothelin-1 (ET-1) also regulates cell differentiation, proliferation, invasion and apoptosis. ET-1 effects are signaled through two
receptor subtypes ETR-A and ETR-B. We tested the hypothesis that the
expression of ET-1 and ETRs is altered in preeclampsia (PE), fetal growth
restriction (FGR) and in gestational diabetes (GDM) and differs between
early (gestational week  34) and late (GW >34) third trimester
pregnancies.
Methods: The study included women (GW 28-41) with PE (blood pressure
>140/90 mmHg, protein >300mg/24hrs; n¼16), with FGR (<10th birthweight centile and pathological umbilical blood ﬂow; n¼7) and PE+FGR
(n¼5) and with GDM (insulin treatment n¼21), as well as age-matched
controls (n¼20). ET-1, ETR-A and ETR-B mRNA and ETR-A and ETR-B
protein were quantiﬁed in placental tissues by real-time PCR and
immunoblotting.
Results:
Table 1: mRNA expression in third trimester pregnancies:
Fold changes versus age-matched controls (p-values)

GW  34

GW > 34

ETR-A

ETR-B

ET-1

ETR-A

ETR-B

ET-1

3.0 (0.01)
3.4
(0.04)
n.s.

2.0
(0.02)
-

0.4
(0.05)
n.s.

-

-

0.6
(0.05)
0.5
(<0.001)

n.s.

GDM

3.5
(0.01)
6.9
(0.003)
3.8
(0.02)
-

0.6
(0.05)
-

FGR

2.6
(0.04)
5.1
(0.05)
n.s

0.8
(0.05)

0.4
(<0.001)

PE
PEDFGR

-: not determined, because no material available, n.s.: not signiﬁcant.
In early third trimester pregnancies ETR-A protein was upregulated (+26%)
only in PE. There were no changes in ETR-B protein. In late third trimester
pregnancies ETR-A (-17%) and ETR-B protein (-33%) were downregulated in
GDM. ETR-B protein was also downregulated in FGR (-23%) and PE (-35%).
Discussion: The upregulation of the ET/ETR system in PE is correlated with
the severity of the disease: mild-late<severe-early<PE+FGR). The ET/ETR
system is downregulated in GDM.
(Grants: 12243, Jubilee Funds , Austrian National Bank and Kulturamt Stadt
Graz)
Keywords: endothelin / endothelin receptor system, preeclampsia, fetal
growth restriction, gestational diabetes

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.63]
PREECLAMPSIA AND NKA AND PMCA ACTIVITIES IN BOTH BASAL AND
MICROVILLOUS MEMBRANES OF THE HUMAN TERM PLACENTA
C. Abad*1, P. Díaz2, C. Vallejos2, N. de Gregorio2, V. Godoy2, D.I. Chiarello1
et al, 1Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas (IVIC),
Venezuela, 2Universidad de Chile, Chile
The human placental syncytiotrophoblast (hSCT) layer is the primary
barrier for transplacental exchange of Na+ and Ca2+ between the mother
and the growing fetus. There is a clear experimental evidence showing the
presence of the Na,K-ATPase (NKA) and the plasma membrane Ca-ATPase
(PMCA) in both basal (BM) and microvillous (MVM) plasma membranes.
Alterations in membrane composition might be involved in a variety of
pregnancy complications such as preeclampsia and this might affect the
activity of the membrane transport proteins such as NKA and PMCA. In the
current study we evaluated if preeclampsia can modify the NKA and PMCA
activities of both BM and MVM of the hSCT. METHODS: The hSCT plasma
membranes of term placentas obtained from normotensive and
preeclamptic women were assayed for NKA and PMCA activities using
a colorimetric method. These membranes were also assayed for lipid
peroxidation level by measuring TBARS. The number of ATPase molecules
was evaluated in hSCT plasma membranes and tissue sections by using
Western blots and immunohistochemistry, respectively. RESULTS: The
hSCT plasma membranes from preeclamptic women show a signiﬁcant
diminution of the NKA and PMCA activities and a signiﬁcant rise in the
level of lipid peroxidation. The Western blots of hSCT plasma membranes
with speciﬁc antibodies against NKA and PMCA, did not show a signiﬁcant
difference between normotensives and preeclamptics. Similar results were
obtained for the immunohistochemistry studies suggesting that the
number of NKA and PMCA molecules in hSCT plasma membranes does not
change with preeclampsia. CONCLUSIONS: The rise in the level of lipid
peroxidation of the hSCT plasma membranes during preeclampsia
promotes a diminution of the NKA and PMCA activities. This diminution of
the ATPase activities of the hSCT does not seem to be related to changes in
the number of NKA and PMCA molecules in hSCT membranes.
Keywords: Preeclampsia, PMCA, NKA, ATPase

A.47

[P1.64]
UMBILICAL VEIN ENDOTHELIUM ACTIVATION IS ASSOCIATED WITH
HIGH MATERNAL LEVELS OF E-SELECTIN, VCAM-1 AND SFLT-1 IN
SEVERE PRE-ECLAMPTIC PREGNANCIES
C Veas1, V Gallardo2, M González2, L Lamperti1, C Escudero3, C Aguayo*1,
Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidad de Concepción, P.O. Box 237, Concepción, Chile., Chile,
2
Vascular Physiology Laboratory, Department of Physiology, Faculty of
Biological Sciences, University of Concepcion, Chile, 3Vascular Physiology
Laboratory, Department of Basic Sciences, Universidad del Bío-Bío, Chillán,
Chile, Chile
1

Background: Severe pre-eclampsia is associated with reduction in
placental blood ﬂow, and low nutrient and oxygen delivery toward the
fetus. Causes for these alterations are unclear, however, maternal proinﬂammatory and prothrombic state and feto-placental endothelial
dysfunction are a hallmark of pre-eclampsia, we wonder whether endothelial activation markers in the maternal circulation are associated with
the nitric oxide (NO) synthesis in fetal endothelium.
Methods: Pregnant women at delivery were recruited at the Hospital
Clínico Guillermo Grant Benavente from Concepción, Chile. Blood samples
were collected from normal (n¼7), mild (n¼7) and severe (n¼10) preeclamptic pregnancies. sE-selectin, sVCAM-1 and sFlt-1 serum quantiﬁcations were performed by ELISA. Endothelial cells were isolated from
human umbilical vein (HUVEC) by digestion with collagenase and histamine-induced NO synthesis was detect by ﬂuorometric examination.
Results: Mother with severe pre-eclamptic pregnancies had premature
and smaller babies than mother with normal pregnancies (p<0.05). This
phenomenon was associated with high maternal plasma levels of sVCAM1 (~2-fold) and sFlt-1 (~2.5-fold) and lower (~300%) histamine-stimulated
NO synthesis in HUVEC. Considering the entire group of patients, a positive
relationship between systolic blood pressure (SBP) and plasma levels of sEselectin, sVCAM-1 and sFlt-1. Moreover, high SBP and diastolic BP and
plasma levels of sE-selectin, sVCAM-1 and sFlt1 were negatively associated
with newborn weight and gestational age at delivery. Women with
elevated levels of sE-selectin (>63 ng/mL), sVCAM-1 (>752 ng/mL) and
sFlt-1 (>15204 pg/mL), showed high risk (RR 2.05, 1.69 and 3.07, respectively) for preterm delivery, very preterm delivery (RR 1.9, 1.21, and 2.66,
respectively), or fetal weigh under 1500 g (RR 2.33, 1.10 and 1.94, respectively) compared with women with low levels.
Conclusions: High serum levels of endothelial dysfunction markers are
associated with poor newborn outcomes such as growth restriction and
pre-term delivery. Severe pre-eclampsia characterized by hypertension
and high maternal circulating levels of sVCAM-1 and sFlt-1 is associated
with decreased NO synthesis in the fetal endothelium.
Supported by FONDECYT 11070035, DIUC-UDEC 205.072.032-1.0,
205.072.031-1.0 and CE is granted by FONDECYT 1100684, DI-UBB
0965091/RS.
Keywords: Preeclampsia, Endothelial cell, Adhesion molecules

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.48

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.65]
UNDERSTANDING THE RELATIVE EXPRESSIONS OF 5-HYDROXYTRYOTAMINE RECEPTOR SUBTYPES IN NORMOTENSIVE AND PRE-ECLAMPTIC
PLACENTAE
A Tamang, R Tagara, GA Buckley, SD Sivasubramaniam*, Nottingham Trent
University, United Kingdom
The distribution of different 5-hydroxytryptamine 5HT receptors in the
central nervous system has extensively been studied. However the information on their peripheral distribution is limited. This study has investigated the relative mRNA expressions of different 5HT receptor subtypes in
normotensive (NT) and pre-eclamptic (PE) placentae at term.
NT and PE placental samples were obtained after informed consent.
Conventional RT-PCR protocols were standardised with primers designed
from Primer3 and Primer blast. The same primers were used in quantitative RTPCR to compare the expressions of major 5HT receptors in relation
to the mRNA expression of b-actin (as control). Analysis of urinary 5-HT
and its metabolite 5-HIAA was carried out using a commercially available
ELISA kit.
The results from conventional PCR have shown that many of the 5HT
receptor mRNAs are expressed in NT and PE placentae. The important ones
include 5HT1B, 1D, 1E, 2A, 2B, 5 and 7. Comparative qRTPCR results
between NT and PE placentae have shown no signiﬁcant differences in the
expressions of 5HT2A (11.82.7 for NT and 9.81.5 for PE) or 5HT7
(9.81.5 for NT and 8.6 1.7 for PE) (Arbitrary units). However the mRNA
expression of 5HT1B receptor in PE placentae was signiﬁcantly reduced
(10.52.1 for NT Vs. 8.41.9 for PE; p<0.05 – Mann Whitney U). Interestingly, PE women had signiﬁcantly higher levels of urinary 5-HT (124.8 
23.6 mg/24 hour urine) compared to NT women (59.5  9.8 mg/24 hour
urine). On the other hand the levels of the metabolite 5-HIAA were similar
in the two groups. Consequently, the ratio of 5-HIAA: 5-HT in PE women
was around half (22.1 3.2) of NT controls (45.9  7.8).
The results show that the relative mRNA expression of 5HT1B receptor is
reduced in PE. This together with increased circulating 5HT in PE may
contribute to pathophysiological changes in PE.
Keywords: 5-hydroxytryptamine, Placenta, pre-eclampsia

[P1.66]
USING FETOMATERNAL INTERACTIONS TO IDENTIFY IMMUNOMODULATORY MECHANISMS IN MELANOMA
SG Holtan, AS Mansﬁeld, DJ Creedon*, WK Nevala, AA Leontovich, SN
Markovic, Mayo Clinic, United States
The malignant potential of melanoma depends on its ability to evade host
immune responses. In vitro and animal models to study immune modulation in melanoma have focused on isolated processes such as involvement of the microenvironment, angiogenesis, or systemic immune
modulation; yet all these mechanisms in concert contribute to melanoma
progression. One condition that mimics this process, including integration
of isolated components of immune modulation, is pregnancy. In fact, we
believe that the physiologic transient, organ system-based immune
modulation in pregnancy, parallels the coordinated response to cancer and
thus can help identify new mechanisms of immune modulation pertinent
to metastatic melanoma. To explore this possibility, we evaluated
expression of 79 immunologically relevant genes involved in endometrial
decidualization and placentation in benign nevi and melanoma to reveal
immune markers associated with pregnancy that are also expressed in
cancer. We then assessed the presence of corresponding proteins by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in a 118-patient metastatic melanoma tumor
microarray (TMA). Using this approach, we identiﬁed two new independent prognostic biomarkers for survival, CD58 and galectin 9, along with
an overall pattern of immunomodulatory protein expression associated
with survival. In pregnancy, alterations in local immune homeostasis that
allow invasion of HLA-disparate trophoblast cells into the maternal
decidua are also detectable systemically. One key example is specialized
CD16- natural killer (NK) cells that are abundant in the decidua are also
expanded in maternal peripheral blood during early pregnancy. In metastatic melanoma, we identiﬁed a similar expansion of peripheral blood
CD16- NK cells, some of which coexpress CD9, representing the ﬁrst
description of this NK cell phenotype outside of the female reproductive
tract. Thus, using pregnancy as a model, we have identiﬁed previously
unexplored mechanisms of immune modulation in metastatic melanoma.
Keywords: immune modulation, tolerance, metastatic melanoma,
CD16-NK cells

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.67]
ACTIVATION OF ADENOSINE RECEPTOR INDUCED MOBILIZATION OF
HUMAN ENDOTHELIAL PROGENITOR CELLS
P Fernández*, E Guzmán-Gutierrez, L Caviedes, V Aguilera, L Lamperti,
C Aguayo, 1Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology, Faculty
of Pharmacy, Universidad de Concepción, P.O. Box 237, Concepción, Chile.,
Chile
Backgroundx: Endothelial progenitor cells (EPC) are involved in repair
processes from damage caused by hypoxia and ischemia and is known that
an increase in extracellular adenosine stimulates angiogenesis and vasculogenesis of endothelial cells. Therefore, adenosine and the presence of
human endothelial progenitor cells contribute to the regulation and
recovery of ischemic injury. However, no studies linking the presence of
adenosine and processes of mobilization and angiogenesis of human
endothelial progenitor cells (hEPC). In this studies characterized the effect
of adenosine in the mobilization and migration of early hEPC.
Methods: The hEPC were obtained from peripheral blood of healthy
donors and mononuclear cells were separated by density gradient and
then cultured for 3 days. Mobilization studies were performed using
transwells (8 mm) in the presence and absence of adenosine (10 mM, 20 hrs)
and NECA (0,1 mM, 20 hrs) a speciﬁc activator of adenosine receptors. The
receptor expression was determined by real-time PCR using speciﬁc
primers for each of them.
Results: Real-time PCR was possible to identify the receptors A2A, A2B and
A3 in hEPC. A3 expression was higher w1,2-fold and w0,3-fold compared
to levels of mRNA for A2A and A2B, respectively. Adenosine, increases
(w1,5-fold) the mobilization of early hEPC compared with the control.
NECA, increased mobilization of hEPC (~2,5-fold) whose effect is partially
blocked by MRS 1523 (0,0005 – 10 mM, 20 hrs) and MRS 1754 (0,0005 – 10
mM, 20 hrs), inhibitors of A3 y A2B, respectively. The analysis of ﬂow citometry shows that the subpopulation of cells mobilized by adenosine
corresponds to the (70%) CD34+/ KDR+ cells, which express the A2B and A3
receptors.
Conclusions: These results suggest that adenosine is involved in migration
and mobilization of the hEPC, mediated by activation of adenosine
receptors.
Funding: Project Initiation FONDECYT 11070035, DIUC-UDEC 205.072.0321.0, 205.072.031-1.0
Keywords: Adenosine receptor, Angiogenesis, endothelial progenitor cell

A.49

[P1.68]
DOCOSAHEXAENOIC ACID, 22:6N-3 STIMULATES EXPRESSION OF
VASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL GROWTH FACTOR IN FIRST TRIMESTERTROPHOBLAST CELLS, HTR8/SVNEO
GM Johnsen1,2, MS Weedon-Fekjær1, AC Staff*1,2, AK Duttaroy1, 1University
of Oslo, Norway, 2Oslo University Hospital, Ulleval, Norway
Inappropriate placentation during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy is
thought to be essential in the development of preeclampsia. Angiogenesis
is a key factor in the placentation process and vascular remodelling that
involves growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
placental growth factor (PlGF) and angiopoietin like protein 4 (ANGPTL4/
PGAR). Maternal LCPUFAs taken up by the placenta are critical for the
growth and development of the fetus. However, very little information is
available on whether LCPUFAs can affect the expression of angiogenic
factors in ﬁrst trimester placental trophoblast cells. We therefore investigated uptake and metabolism of LCPUFAs such as arachidonic acid,
20:4n-6 (ARA), eicosapentaenoic acid, 20:5n-3 (EPA), docosahexaenoic
acid, 22:6n-3(DHA), peroxisome proliferator-activator receptor (PPAR)
ligands, and non-essential oleic acid, 18:1n-9 (OA), and their effects on
expression of relevant genes in ﬁrst trimester trophoblast cells, HTR8/
Svneo.
Methods: Uptake of these fatty acids was determined after incubating
HTR8/Svneo cells with radiolabeled fatty acids for 3h. Expression of several
relevant genes and proteins levels of these factors were quantiﬁed after
incubating these cells with fatty acids (100mM) for 24h, using real-time
qRT-PCR, and ELISA. Cell viability was also examined.
Results: We found that HTR8/Svneo cells take up fatty acids in the
following order; ARA >>EPA>>>>>>DHA in contrast to the last
trimester trophoblast cells which prefer DHA over other fatty acids. Among
all the fatty acids and PPAR ligands tested, only DHA increased VEGF mRNA
expression and protein (by 8-fold) compared with control in these cells.
OA, EPA, ARA and GW-501516 (a PPARdelta agonist) stimulated ANGPTL4/
PGAR mRNA expression and protein levels while DHA had no effect. These
fatty acids however did not alter expression of other genes such as FABPs,
FAT/CD36, FABPpm, FATP1,2,3,4 &6, CAV-1, ACSL1,3,4 &5, HIF1a, and COX-2.
Conclusions: DHA may inﬂuence placentation processes by stimulating
the expression of VEGF in ﬁrst trimester trophoblast cells.
Keywords: Docosahexaneoic acid, Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor,
Fatty acid transprt, First trimester trophoblast cells

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.50

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.69]
PROLACTIN-LIKE PROTEIN A AND UTERINE NATURAL KILLER CELL
ROLES IN MODULATING UTERINE VASCULAR RESPONSES TO HYPOXIA
IN THE PREGNANT MOUSE ENDOMETRIUM
Eliana Lippe*1,2, Damayanti Chakraborty1,2, Michael Soares1,2, Aureo
Yamada1, 1University of Campinas, Brazil, 2University of Kansas Medical
Center, United States
Experimental studies provide evidence that oxygen tension impacts
placentation and uterine vascular development. The present work evaluated roles for prolactin-like protein-A (PLPA) and uterine NK (uNK) cells on
organization and vascularization of the placentation site during normal
pregnancy and following exposure to hypoxia. Beginning on gestational
day (gd) 7.5, wild type, and PLPA-/- knockout, IL15-/- knockout (uNK
depleted), and PLPA-/-/IL15-/- double knockout pregnant mice were
exposed to a hypoxic environment (11% oxygen) for 48h or were exposed
to ambient conditions (21% oxygen; normoxia). Healthy and abnormally
developing conceptuses were counted on gd 9.5 and collected for assessing
the distributions of uNK cells (anti-perforin), evaluation of vasculogenesis
(anti-endoglin, anti-MECA32), trophoblast development (TROMA1), and
the expression of VEGF isoforms. The incidence of abnormal (small/
hemorrhagic) placentation sites in wild type pregnancies was 1:30, while
in the PLPA-/-, IL15-/-, and PLPA-/-/IL15-/- pregnancies the frequencies of
abnormal placentation sites increased to 1:7, 1:5 and 1:6, respectively.
Hypoxia exposure increased the incidence of abnormal placentation sites
in wild type animals to 1:16 but did not signiﬁcantly affect the frequency of
abnormal placentation sites in the knockout animals. Endoglin positive
endothelial cells (EC) were seen lining the mesometrial capillary sinuses
within the decidua of wild type and PLPA-/- null pregnancies. On the other
hand, MECA32 positive EC were found primarily in the large arterial and
venous blood vessels of mesometrial endometrium near the myometrium.
MECA32 immunostaining increased following hypoxia exposure in the
PLPA-/- and IL15-/- animals, but not in the wild type mice. VEGF gene
expression decreased in the PLPA-/- and IL15-/- endometrium. Hypoxia
exposure resulted in an increase of VEGF B and C expression. In conclusion,
PLPA and uNK cells positively support pregnancy. In their absence, alternative pathways can be mobilized for successful adaptation to ischemic
stress.
Grants: CAPES(4683-08-0) and NIH (HD20676)
Keywords: Hypoxia, Angiogenesis, uterine Natural Killer cells, Prolactin
like protein-A (PLPA)

[P1.70]
MELATONIN INHIBITS HYPOXIA/REOXYGENATION-INDUCED APOPTOSIS
OF PRIMARY HUMAN VILLOUS TROPHOBLAST
D Lanoix*, AA Lacasse, C Vaillancourt, INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier,
Canada
Introduction: The effects of melatonin on human villous trophoblast
survival have never been studied. Melatonin possesses anti-apoptotic and
cytoprotective properties. We have demonstrated that human placental
villous trophoblast synthesizes melatonin and expresses its MT1- and MT2
receptors. Villous trophoblast homeostasis is essential to pregnancy and
fetal development well-being. Stressors, such as hypoxia/reperfusion,
damage villous trophoblast mitochondria, triggering apoptosis and
necrosis which are increased in pathologic pregnancies, such as
preeclampsia. Our goal was to determine the role of melatonin on villous
trophoblast mitochondrial apoptosis.
Methods: We tested the effect of  melatonin (10 mM) on human term
villous trophoblast cultures subject to hypoxia/reoxygenation compared to
normoxia. Mitochondrial induced apoptosis was determined by assessing
the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential by ﬂuorimetry using the
JC-1 probe and by assessing the protein expression of BAX, Bcl-2, caspase-3
and 9, cleaved ROCK-I, cleaved PARP1 (poly [ADP-ribose] polymerase 1),
VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) and HIF-1 (hypoxia-inducible
factor 1) by Western blots.
Results: Hypoxia/reoxygenation signiﬁcantly increased the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and expression of pro-apoptotic molecules
BAX, caspase 3 and 9, cleaved ROCK-I, cleaved PARP1, VEGF and HIF-1
compared to normoxia. Melatonin signiﬁcantly inhibits the hypoxia/
reoxygenation increases in these pro-apoptotic parameters. There is no
difference between normoxia and melatonin treatment of hypoxia/
reoxygenation.
Discussion: Melatonin prevents hypoxia/reoxygenation induced mitochondrial apoptosis in villous trophoblast. These results demonstrate that
melatonin inhibits apoptosis of primary human villous trophoblast, suggesting a protective role for melatonin in pregnancy and fetal development.
Supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC) discovery grant (CV), a PhD studentship from Quebec
Health Research Fund (DL) and an MSc studentship from NSERC (AAL).
Keywords: Melatonin, Primary villous trophoblast, Hypoxia/reoxygenation, Mitochondrial apoptosis

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.71]
THE MATERNAL HYPERGLYCEMIA, REGARDLESS OF DIAGNOSIS OF DIABETES, WITH RESPECT ADVERSE PERINATAL OUTCOMES IN FETAL
OXYGENATION
FH Saito*, G Morceli, JB Moreli, AMC Ruocco, DC Damasceno, IMP Calderon,
Sao Paulo State University, Botucatu Medical School, Post graduate
Program in Gynecology, Obstetrics and Mastology, Brazil
Introduction: Adverse perinatal outcomes (APO) with signiﬁcant
impairment of fetal oxygenation are frequent in gestational (GDM) or
pregestational (PGDM) Diabetes mellitus. These results are associated with
quality of glycemic control during pregnancy1. Our program has identiﬁed
a group of women who presents normal OGTT100g and hyperglycemia in
glucose proﬁle (GP). Pregnant women in this group are carriers of Mild
hyperglycemia (MH) and treated for the control of high glycemia2,3.
Therefore, we intend to compare the markers of fetal oxygenation between
women with GDM, PGDM, MH and non-diabetic (ND).
Method: It was performed a cohort of women with GDM (n¼22), PGDM
(n¼15), MH (n¼18) and ND (n¼31) and their newborns (NB). The diagnosis
of GDM and MH was carried out by OGTT100g, applied in parallel with GP,
between 24 and 28 weeks of gestation. The maternal parameters evaluated
were glucose mean (GM) and glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c). Markers of
fetal oxygenation evaluated were hematocrit (Ht), hemoglobin (Hb), cord
pH, Apgar score, total (Bt), direct (Bd) and indirect (Bi) bilirubin, need for
phototherapy and hospitalization in ICU. It was used the t test to compare
means and chi-square test for proportions (p<0.05).
Results: GM and HbA1c: higher values in MH (103.21mg/dL; 5.98%), GDM
(109.23mg/dL; 6.37%) and PGDM (121.89mg/dL; 6.94%) compared to ND
(81.7mg/dL; 5.55%); hematocrit and hemoglobin: higher values in MH
(15.77g/dL; 48.09%), GDM (15.50g/dL; 55.29%) and PGDM (16.78g/dL;
51.82%) compared to ND (13.61g/dL; 46.61%).
Discussion: Alterations on the maternal parameters and markers of fetal
oxygenation of women with high glycemia were observed especially in
relation to HbA1c, hematocrit and hemoglobin. These results indicate that,
regardless of diagnosis of diabetes, the hyperglycemia present in the
intrauterine environment increases the APO risk related to intrauterine
oxygenation. Maternal hyperglycemia, in any source and intensity, must be
controlled.
References:
1
Taricco E, Radaelli T, Rossi G, Nobile de Santis MS, Bulfamante GP, Avagliano L. Cetin I. BJOG. 2009. 116(13):1729-35.
2
Rudge MV, Peraçoli JC, Berezowski AT, Calderon IM, Brazil MA. Braz J Med
Biol Res. 1990. 23(11):1079-89.
3
American Diabetes Association (ADA). Diagnosis and classiﬁcation of
diabete mellitus. Diabetes Care. 2009. 32(Suppl 1):S62-S67. Avaliable in:
http://care.diabetesjournals.org/cgi/reprint/32/Supplement_1/S62.
Keywords: Hyperglycemia, Fetal oxygenation, Pregnancy

A.51

[P1.72]
WHICH PLACENTAL ZONE IS MORE AFFECTED IN CASES OF EXPERIMENTAL INTRAUTERINE HYPOXIA?
LR Yamamoto1, LP Rocha1, GC Guimarães2, ECC Castro1, CSO Guimarães1,
RRM Corrêa*1 et al, 1Triângulo Mineiro Federal University, Brazil, 2Lavras
Federal University, Brazil
Introduction: In humans, alterations of differentiation and division of
trophoblast facing adverse conditions can often cause compensatory
pathological changes of the placenta. In experimental models, rats of
different strains are commonly used as a model for studies of embryology
and reproduction toxicology. Surprisingly, the literature does not provide
comprehensive baseline data on placental development of these animals.
Objective: To evaluate the thickness of the placental zones facing the
intrauterine growth restriction experimentally induced.
Methods: To induce uteroplacental insufﬁciency and intrauterine growth
restriction in Wistar rats, the right uterine artery was ligated on the 15th
day of gestation and euthanasia penformed on the 19th day. The placental
zones were morphologically examined using Hematoxylin-Eosin staining.
Measurements were made with the use of a video camera coupled to
a common light microscope and a computer with an automatic image
analyzing software.
Results: The junctional zone was signiﬁcantly higher in cases with ligation
(p0.001). There was no signiﬁcant difference in the thickness of the
intermediate and labyrinth zones.
Discussion and Conclusion: The increased thickness of the junctional
zone in cases with the ligation may be related to a compensatory mechanism of their cells of glycogen, which would increase in number or
functionally to compensate for the lack of energy. Although the labyrinth
zone has the largest area of maternal-fetal exchange, its time response can
be higher than in the junctional zone, and therefore, its changes only
detected after a long period of hypoxia. Further studies are needed to
clarify the unbalance of the differentiation of strains of trophoblast cells
from the placenta of rodents against hypoxia.
Keywords: intrauterine restriction, hypoxia, morphometry, placental zone

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.52

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.73]
POMEGRANATE JUICE REDUCES OXIDATIVE STRESS IN TERM HUMAN
PLACENTA
Methodius Tuuli*, Mark Longtine, D. Michael Nelson
Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, United States
Introduction: Oxidative stress is implicated in several complications of
pregnancy.
Pomegranate juice (PJ), a rich natural source of polyphenols, reduces
oxidative stress and apoptosis in a murine model of ischemic-reperfusion
injury (Loren,D.J., et al., Pediatr Res, 2005. 57(6): 858-64; West, T. et al., Dev
Neurosci, 2007. 29(4-5): 363-72). Labor induces placental oxidative stress
(Cindrova-Davies, T., et al., Am J Pathol, 2007. 171(4): 1168-79), providing
a convenient model to test the ability of PJ to moderate oxidative stress
during pregnancy.
Objective: We tested the hypothesis that PJ reduces oxidative stress in
term human placenta.
Methods: Proteins were extracted from placentas of women with normal
term pregnancies administered 8oz per day of commercially available PJ
(POM Wonderful, Los Angeles, CA) in the last two weeks of pregnancy who
underwent long labor (>5hrs, n¼4) and from women with normal term
pregnancies not administered PJ who underwent short (<5hrs, n¼4) or
long (>5hrs, n¼4) labors. Proteins were also extracted from placental
explants (n¼4) and primary human syncytiotrophoblasts (PHTs, n¼4)
cultured under hypoxia (<1% oxygen) for 8 and 24 hours, respectively,
with and without PJ at a concentration of 1:300. Proteins were separated
by SDS-PAGE and levels of heat shock protein 90 (HSP 90) determined by
immunoblot analysis.
Results: Median levels of HSP 90 were elevated in both short and long
labored placentas, and in explants and PHTs cultured under hypoxia. PJ
signiﬁcantly reduced placental HSP 90 in women who underwent labor (p
< 0.01) (Figure 1). PJ also reduced HSP 90 in explants and PHTs cultured
under hypoxia in media with PJ compared to those without PJ.
Discussion: PJ reduces oxidative stress in labored placentas in vivo and in
explants and placental trophoblasts cultured under hypoxia in vitro. We
speculate that prenatally administered PJ may reduce hypoxia-related
perinatal complications.

[P1.74]
PHYSIOLOGICAL REMODELLING OF THE UTERINE SPIRAL ARTERIES
DURING PREGNANCY: UTERINE NATURAL KILLER CELLS MEDIATE
SMOOTH MUSCLE CELL DISRUPTION
LK Harris*1, A Robson2, GE Lash2, JD Aplin1, PN Baker3, JN Bulmer1,
University of Manchester, United Kingdom, 2University of Newcastle,
United Kingdom, 3University of Alberta, Canada

1

Introduction: The early stages of spiral artery remodelling are characterised by disruption of vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) layers, which
is coincident with an inﬂux of uterine natural killer (uNK) cells [1].
Subsequently, extravillous trophoblast (EVT) colonises the vascular wall,
replacing the endothelium and VSMC. We hypothesised that soluble
factors secreted by uNK cells induce VSMC disorganisation and dedifferentiation, facilitating the entry of EVT.
Methods: uNK cells and EVT were isolated from ﬁrst trimester decidua and
placenta. Unremodelled spiral arteries obtained from non-pregnant,
pre-menopausal women undergoing hysterectomy were cultured with
conditioned medium (CM; 20% (v/v)) from uNK cells, EVT or uNK-EVT
co-cultures for up to 96h. Additional vessels were pre-treated with uNKCM for 48h, then co-cultured with EVT.
Results: VSMC in arteries cultured with uNK-CM for 48h or more displayed
reduced a-smooth muscle actin immunoreactivity consistent with dedifferentiation, became misaligned with the appearance of spaces between
layers, and showed altered nuclear morphology, when compared to
arteries cultured with control CM, EVT-CM or uNK-EVT co-culture CM.
VSMC disruption was localised to discrete areas of the vessel wall and did
not cause a signiﬁcant change in mean arterial diameter or medial area.
When seeded onto spiral arteries, EVT colonised the mural tissue after 48h,
although the number of invading cells was low within this timeframe.
Pre-treatment of arteries with uNK-CM did not increase the number of EVT
colonising the vessels; however, the area of the arterial wall exhibiting
VSMC disruption was increased, compared to arteries pre-treated with
control CM.
Discussion: Soluble factors secreted by uNK cells induced focal disorganisation and dedifferentiation of VSMC within spiral arteries, initiating mural disruption prior to colonisation by EVT. As previously
suggested [1], strict spatio-temporal regulation of remodelling events is
critical, as uNK - EVT interactions reduced the ability of uNK cells to
produce vasoactive factors.
[1] Smith SD, Dunk CE, Aplin JD, Harris LK, Jones RL (2009) Evidence for
immune cell involvement in decidual spiral arteriole remodeling in early
human pregnancy. Am J Pathol. 174, 1959-1971.
Keywords: uterine natural killer cells, vascular smooth muscle, remodelling, trophoblast invasion

ĂFigure 1. Levels of HSP 90 (normalized to actin) in placentas of women with normal
term pregnancies administered pomegranate juice who underwent labor (>5hrs.
n¼4) and placentas of women not administered pomegranate juice who underwent
short (<5hrs. n¼4) and long (>5hrs. n¼4) labor

Keywords: Pomegranate juice, Polyphenols, Oxidative stress, HSP 90

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.75]
EFFECT OF MAGNESIUM SULFATE ON CA-ATPASE ACTIVITY AND LIPID
PEROXIDATION OF THE SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST PLASMA MEMBRANES
ISOLATED FROM EXPLANTS OF HUMAN TERM PLACENTA INCUBATED
UNDER HYPOXIA

A.53

[P1.76]
NAD(P)H-OXIDASE: EXPRESSION AND ACTIVITY IN MOUSE POST
IMPLANTATION TROPHOBLAST CELLS
S.M.Z. Gomes*, A.R. Lorenzon, C Bandeira, M Hoshida, L.R. Lopes, E.B.
Bevilacqua, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil

Cilia Abad*, Jessica Pernia, Desireé Botana et al, IVIC, Venezuela
Preeclampsia is a clinical syndrome exclusive of the human pregnancy and
constitutes the major cause of maternal and fetal morbility and mortality
worldwide. It is characterized by high blood pressure, proteinuria, generalized arterial vasospasm and edema; appearing, in general, after the 20th
week of pregnancy. It is widely accepted that during preeclampsia there is
an abnormal trophoblast invasion, which avoids the formation of the low
resistance/high ﬂux circuit in the maternal-fetal axis, which is characteristic of the normal pregnancy. This leads to placental hypoxia and consequently to a rise in the level of lipid peroxidation and a diminution of the
Ca-ATPase activity. The standard treatment for severe preeclampsia in the
last 60 years has been magnesium sulfate (MgSO4). This treatment blocks
the seizures seen during eclampsia, and it has several beneﬁcial effects for
both the mother and the fetus.
Objectives: To determine the effect of MgSO4 on Ca-ATPase activity and
lipid peroxidation levels in the plasma membranes of explants from
human term placenta incubated under hypoxia.
Methods: Explants of full term placentas from normotensive pregnant
women were prepared and incubated under normoxia (8% O2) or hypoxia
(2% O2) for 18h at 37 C. The syncytiotrophoblast plasma membranes were
isolated and incubated for 24h at 4 C in the presence and absence of
MgSO4. Ca-ATPase activity and TBARS were determined.
Results: It was found an important increase in the level of lipid peroxidation from both the microvillous and basal plasma membranes in
placental explants incubated under hypoxia. The Ca-ATPase activity was
lower in the plasma membranes of syncytiotrophoblast explants from
placenta incubated under hypoxia. Incubation with MgSO4 led to increased
Ca-ATPase activity and decreased lipid peroxidation levels.
Conclusions: MgSO4 can reverse both the diminution of the Ca-ATPase
activity and the increased of lipid peroxidation levels seen in placental
explants incubated under hypoxia.
Keywords: Hypoxia, Lipid peroxidation, Ca-ATPase, Magnesium sulfate

The complex NAD(P)H-oxidase catalyzes the production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS). This plasma membrane-cell enzyme is formed by the
membrane-bound components gp91-phox and p22-phox, the ﬂavocytochrome b558 and, the cytosolic components p47-phox, p67-phox,
Rac1 and p40-phox. Implanting trophoblast cells exhibit intense phagocytic activity and ultracytochemical localization of hydrogen peroxidegenerating sites suggesting a NAD(P)H oxidase expression at maternalfetal interface.
Objective: characterize the expression and activity of NAD(P)H oxidase
complex in the trophoblast cells under the framework of the implantation
process.
Materials Methods: Ectoplacental cones from 7.5-dg embryos grown as
primary cultures, stimulated or not with PMA were used to investigate the
production of superoxide anion through dihydroethydium oxidation
(DHE) in confocal microscopy and immune co-localization assays for
detection of the assemble and activation of the enzyme complex . The
subunits gp91phox, p22phox, p40phox, p47phox, p67phox and Rac1 were
analyzed by rt-PCR, Western Blotting and IHC.
Results: NAD(P)H subunits were expressed and upregulated after PMA
(phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate) treatment. Confocal microscopy
imaging showed co-localization of cytosolic and plasma membrane NAD
(P)H oxidase subunits mainly after PMA treatment, suggesting to depend
on speciﬁc stimuli. Cultured ectoplacental cones produced superoxide in
a NAD(P)H-dependent manner suggesting that the ROS production may be
associated to the implantation process. DNA sequencing showed high
degree of homology between the trophoblast and neutrophil NAD(P)
H-oxidase subunits.
Conclusion: Post-implanting trophoblast cells express NAD(P)H-oxidase
complex subunits, suggesting a putative role for ROS production in the
physiology of implantation.
Financial support: FAPESP, CNPq, CAPES
Keywords: NAD(P)H-oxidase, Trophoblast, implantation, ROS

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.54

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.77]
HORMONAL REGULATION OF HIF-1 (HYPOXIA-INDUCIBLE FACTOR-1)
TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVITY IN THE BEWO CELL LINE

[P1.78]
A QUANTITATIVE INVESTIGATION OF TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVITY IN
SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST NUCLEI DURING HUMAN GESTATION

N.P. Illsley*, E Fik, S Zamudio, 1Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's
Health, UMDNJ, United States, 2Preventive Medicine and Community
Health, UMDNJ, United States

N.M.E Fogarty*1,2, T Cindrova-Davies1,2, T.M Mayhew2, A.C FergusonSmith1,2, G.J Burton1,2, 1Dept. Physiology Neuroscience and Development,
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Trophoblast
Research, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3University of Nottingham, United Kingdom

Introduction: Although HIF-1 has been characterized as a hypoxiaresponsive transcription factor there is evidence to suggest that it can be
regulated by factors other than oxygen tension. It is possible therefore that
HIF-1 levels are the sum of several inﬂuences, including hypoxia. We
hypothesized that hormones which modulate growth and metabolism
would demonstrate regulatory effects on HIF-1 transcriptional activity.
Methods: To measure HIF-1 transcriptional activity we used a BeWo
choriocarcinoma cell subclone which stably expresses a luciferase reporter
gene coupled to a promoter containing multiple hypoxia-response
elements, generated following lentiviral transduction. Cells were preincubated for 24 hr in serum-free medium then cultured for 18 hr in the
presence of insulin (20 mIU/ml), IGF-I (200 ng/ml), leptin (100 ng/ml), pGH
(25 ng/ml) or FBS (10%). A positive control group was cultured in the
presence of 0.5 mM DMOG (dimethyloxallylglycine), a hypoxia mimetic.
Luciferase activity was measured in quadruplicate using a bioluminescence assay. Data was analysed by ANOVA (Dunnett post hoc test).
Results: Luciferase activity in the control group was signiﬁcantly above
background and was assigned a value of 1.00.07 (meanSEM; n¼3).
Treatment with DMOG generated an increase in luciferase activity of
8.090.39 fold compared to control (p<0.01). The other agents showed no
effects with the exception of IGF-I; treatment with IGF-I increased luciferase activity by 2.08  0.15 fold (p<0.05) compared to control.
Discussion: These data show that there is signiﬁcant HIF-1 transcriptional
activity in the absence of stimulatory agents (>10 fold above background),
suggesting a constitutive level of HIF-1 synthesis in these cells. As
expected, transcriptional activity was highly upregulated by the hypoxia
mimetic. HIF-1 transcriptional activity was also upregulated by IGF-I
although not by the other agents. These results suggest that IGF-I may
contribute to the regulation of HIF-1 in trophoblast cells in vivo, in addition
to the previously observed effects of hypoxia.

Introduction: The syncytiotrophoblast (STB) is a terminally differentiated,
multi-nucleated syncytium. No mitotic bodies are observed in the STB,
which is sustained by continuous fusion of cytotrophoblast cells (CTB). As
a result, STB nuclei are of different ages and display varying degrees of
heterochromatin. Until recently, it was thought that STB nuclei were
transcriptionally inactive, with all mRNAs required by the syncytium being
incorporated upon fusion of CTB. However, research now shows the
presence of the active form of RNA polymerase II (RNAP) in some STB
nuclei[1]. The aim of this study was to quantify the proportion of active
nuclei at different gestational ages.
Methods: Parafﬁn-embedded placentas (n¼22), ranging from 13-39
weeks, used for the estimation of STB nuclear number [2] were studied. For
each placenta three blocks were selected at random, and adjacent 5mm
sections cut. The proportion of RNAP-positive STB nuclei was quantiﬁed by
the Disector method. Numerical densities of volumes of trophoblast
sampled were calculated. Co-localisation of Proliferating Cell Nuclear
Antigen and RNAP was used to investigate the relationship between
recently fused nuclei and RNAP positivity.
Results: There was no correlation between gestational age and numerical
density of RNAP positive nuclei (r2¼0.0765, p¼0.2248). The numerical
density remained constant throughout gestation.

ĂFigure 1. Evidence of RNAP activity in STB nuclei. (A-D) immunohistochemistry for
RNAP, where black arrows indicate RNAP positive nuclei and blue arrows highlight
negative staining. Gestational ages in weeks are shown in the right-hand colour.

Conclusion: These ﬁndings have shown that transcription takes place in
a proportion of STB nuclei throughout gestation. Since the number of STB
nuclei increases exponentially (0.62 x 1010 nuclei at 13-15 weeks to 5.81 x
1010 at 37-39 weeks) and the numerical density of RNAP positivity remains
constant, we conclude the number of transcriptionally active nuclei also
increases exponentially. Further research is needed to determine the
mechanisms controlling the maintenance of heterochromatin in STB nuclei
including investigating chromatin modiﬁcations and heterochromatinbinding proteins.
[1] Ellery PM, et al. Placenta 2009;30:329-34.
[2] Simpson RA, et al. Placenta 1992;13:501-12.
NF is supported by an ASGBI studentship.
Keywords: Syncytiotrophoblast, Transcription, RNA Polymerase II

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.55

[P1.79]
HYPERGLYCEMIA INDUCES OXIDATIVE STRESS IN FIRST TRIMESTER
TROPHOBLAST-DERIVED ACH-3P CELLS

[P1.80]
BLOOD AND PLACENTAL OXIDATIVE STRESS ASSESSMENT IN RATS
WITH MILD DIABETES

Julia Fröhlich*, Peter Michael Abuja, Gernot Desoye, Berthold Huppertz,
Medical University of Graz, Austria

B. Dallaqua*1, A.P.M. Spada1, T. Rodrigues2, Y.K Sinzato1, I.M.P. Calderon1,
D.C. Damasceno1, 1Botucatu Medical School, UNESP – São Paulo State
University, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Laboratory of
Experimental Research in Gynecology and Obstetrics, São Paulo State,
Brazil., Brazil, 2ABC Federal University (UFABC), Center of Natural and
Human Sciences (CCNH), Brazil

Objectives: Pregnancy is a state of oxidative stress arising from increased
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS formation is often
augmented in disease states associated with inﬂammation such as
diabetes.
We hypothesize that diabetes-associated hyperglycemia leads to increased
ROS generation in trophoblasts resulting in their altered proliferation
potential that can be prevented by antioxidants.
Methods: Trophoblasts (ACH-3P cell line) and explants of the ﬁrst
trimester of pregnancy (wk 6-12) were cultured under hyper- and normoglycemic (HG: 25 vs NG: 5.5mM D-glucose) and different oxygen
conditions (2.5, 8 and 21%). ACH-3P proliferation was measured by
counting of viable and dead cells (CASY). In explants, the proportion of
proliferation-marker (Ki-67) positive cells was counted after immunostaining. Oxidative stress was measured by a ﬂuorescence assay (H2DCFDA)
after adapting it to a multiwell format.
Results: ACH-3P cells treated under HG at 2.5 and 8% oxygen produced up
to 1.8-fold (p<0.001) more ROS than under NG. At 21% oxygen HG led to
a 30% reduction of ROS formation (p<0.001). Proliferation rates of ACH-3P
cells showed no signiﬁcant alterations by HG under 2.5 and 8% oxygen. At
21% oxygen HG resulted in 60% fewer (p<0.001) viable cells. Addition of
the antioxidant ascorbic acid and tocopherol (Trolox) did not restore the
proliferation potential of ACH-3P by HG and 21% oxygen. Placental
explants exhibited decreased proliferation rates up to 35% (p<0.01) by HG
at 21% oxygen whereas at 2.5% oxygen no signiﬁcant alteration were
observed. At 8% oxygen up to 4-fold (p<0.001) more Ki-67 positive cells
were counted under HG.
Conclusion: Hyperglycemia leads to elevated ROS generation in ACH-3P
cells under 2.5 and 8% oxygen. This is most likely due to enhanced
glycolysis. At 21% oxygen the lower ROS levels and decreased proliferation
potential under hyperglycemia and 21% oxygen can be a consequence of
reduced cell metabolism.
Keywords: oxidative stress, hyperglycemia, trophoblasts, placental
explants

Introduction: The placenta generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) which
may contribute to the oxidative stress seen even in normal pregnancy.
However, ROS is increased in pregnancies complicated by IUGR and pregestational diabetes1. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to assess
oxidative stress in blood and placentas of rats with mild diabetes.
Methods: Diabetes was induced by subcutaneous streptozotocin (100 mg/
kg) in Wistar rats (mild diabetes group - MD) on the day of birth. As adults,
DM and control (C) rats were mated. The presence of spermatozoa in
vaginal smears was used to indicate day zero of pregnancy. Glycemia was
measured at days 0, 7, 14 and 21 of pregnancy. On day 21, the animals were
anesthetized and killed. Blood was collected for the assessment of superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), and glutathione
redutase (GSH-Rd) activity, as well as thiol groups (SH) and malonaldehyde (MDA) concentrations. Placentas were processed for the evaluation of
SOD and catalase activity, and glutathione reduced (GSH), MDA and SH
concentrations. Statistical analyses were performed using the s test of
Student and normal-inverse gamma distribution (p<0.05).
Results: In the DM group, glycemic mean was > 120mg/dL on days 0 and
14 of pregnancy (p<0.05) and signiﬁcantly increased GSH-Px and catalase
activity in blood and placental tissue, respectively (p<0.05).
Discussion: Glycemic ﬁndings at 14 days of gestation were consistent with
those reported by Triadou et al. (1982) who observed changes in carbohydrate metabolism leading to glucose intolerance. The increased GSH-Px
concentration and catalase activity, and the non-exacerbation in MDA
concentrations observed in the diabetic groups suggest a maternal
protective mechanism against the oxidative damages caused by hyperglycemia and pregnancy. In this study, increasing the production of antioxidative biomarkers was enough to reduce maternal oxidative stress.
FINANCIAL SUPPORT: FAPESP (Number Process: 07/02673-1)
References:
1. Myatt L. Review: Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species and functional
adaptation of the placenta. Placenta, 2010; 31:S66-9.
2. Triadou N, Portha B, Picon L, Rosselin G. Experimental chemical diabetes
and pregnancy in the rat. Diabetes, 1982; 31: 75-9.
Keywords: Diabetes, Placenta, Oxidative stress, rats

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.56

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.81]
ANTIOXIDANT ENZYMES DURING PLACENTAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE
RAT
S San Martin*1,2, B Ponzio3, Z Fortes3, T Zorn3, MC Franco4, A Moller1 et al
1
Universidad de Valparaiso, Chile, 2CREAS, Chile, 3University of Sao Paulo,
Brazil, 4Federal University of São Paulo., Brazil
Introduction: Placental oxidative stress plays a role in maternal disorders,
principally preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. However, in
normal pregnancy placenta deals with the presence of reactive oxygen
species (ROS). ROS accumulation is limited by antioxidant enzymes,
including superoxide dismutases (SODs), which catalyse the conversion of
superoxide to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and oxygen, and glutathione
peroxidase (GPX), that inactivate H2O2.
During pregnancy, an increase in maternal blood ﬂow occurs accompanied
by fetal growth and placenta size increase. It is probably during this period
that differences in placental antioxidant enzymes distribution get
established.
Objectives: To determine the distribution of SOD1 and GPX during
placental development in rats.
Material and Methods: Rat placentas were collected on days 14, 17 and 20
postcoitum. We used immunoperoxidase technique to identify SOD1 and
GPX in different regions of placenta, which was visualized and captured
with a CX81 microscope and DP71 digital camera (Olympus).
Results: Placental weights increased markedly from day 17 to 20 of
pregnancy, related to an increase of labyrinth region growth. SOD1 and
GPX were observed in all regions of the placenta. However, the distribution
in the labyrinth region increases during ﬁnal stages of pregnancy. In the
spongiotrophoblast region only GPX have an increase in their distribution.
In the giant trophoblast cells region, both enzymes were observed during
all period of study with similar distribution.
Conclusion: Placental distribution of antioxidant defenses increases
during ﬁnal stages of pregnancy in rats, particularly in the labyrinth region,
the site of maternal-fetal exchange. This result goes in parallel with a gene
expression increment for these enzymes as it has been observed by others
and probably this is related to an increase of placental size and blood ﬂow.
Acknowledgment: Dipuv 07/2008; CI 05/2006 (Universidad de Valparaiso, Chile) and CONICYT (ACT-73), Chile.
Keywords: SOD 1, Glutathion peroxidase, Placenta, Rat

[P1.82]
CULTURING IN LOW OXYGEN TENSION PROMOTES INVASIVE TROPHOBLAST DIFFERENTIATION AND REDUCES OXIDATIVE STRESS IN
EMBRYOS
LA Underhill*, JC Robins, Women and Infant Hospital/ Alpert Medical
School of Brown University, United States
Objective: Cell culture experiments suggest that oxygen tension may play
a critical role in promoting embryo development. The purpose of this study
was to determine the oxygen tension to promote optimal trophoblast
proliferation and embryo development.
Methods: Mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSC) were cultured in 2% to 20%
oxygen tension and the proliferation rate was determined. Differentiation
was induced by removing proliferation factors from the media and
assessed by measuring pathway speciﬁc gene expression. In parallel
experiments, mouse embryos were cultured in low oxygen (2%, 5%, 20%)
and assessed for trophoblast proliferation and developmental competence.
The effect of oxygen on implantation was measured by evaluating
trophoblast outgrowths. Oxidative stress (OS) was assessed by measuring
intracellular hydrogen peroxide production; the effect of oxygen on
endogenous antioxidant production was measured with real time PCR.
Results: Low oxygen tension induced TSC proliferation by 2.5-fold and
promoted their differentiation into spngiotrophoblast cells as determined
by increased expression of tpbp; optimal differentiation occurred at 5%
oxygen. Consistent with these data, mouse embryos in low oxygen had
greater rates of trophoblast proliferation as measured by hatching. Also
consistent with the stem cell data, embryos cultured in 5% oxygen induced
the expression of tpbp. Embryos at 5% oxygen also had better morphology
than embryos cultured at either 2% or 20% oxygen. There was no
demonstrated effect on invasion. However, there was signiﬁcantly less
oxidative stress (OS) and signiﬁcantly more antioxidant gene expression at
5% oxygen tension.
Conclusions: Low oxygen tension promotes the proliferation of trophoblast cells in monolayer cell culture and within the blastocyst. Further, 5%
promotes healthy morphology and reduces OS. These effects may be do to
a protective effect of low oxygen on embryo development. However, the
molecular mechanisms of this beneﬁt are unclear and the ideal oxygen
tension has not been established.
Keywords: Low oxygen, Embryo morphology, spongiotrophoblast, oxidative stress

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P1.83]
DOES A LOW OXYGEN ENVIRONMENT AFFECT SHEDDING OF SYNCYTIAL
KNOTS AND RELEASE OF INFLAMMATORY MEDIATORS FROM THE
HUMAN PLACENTA?
Qi Chen*, XienLei Liversidge, Peter Stone, Larry Chamley, The University of
Auckland, New Zealand
Introduction: Preeclampsia affects 3-5% of pregnancies and is characterised by endothelial cell activation. Syncytial knots shed from placenta
into maternal blood circulation are recognised as one of the potential
pathogenic triggers of preeclampsia. Poor placental perfusion is associated
with some cases of preeclampsia. This had led to the hypothesis that
placental hypoxia may have a role in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia, but
that hypothesis has been questioned recently. We previously showed that
a change in the nature of syncytial knots from apoptotic to necrotic may
cause systemic endothelial cell dysfunction. In this study we investigated
whether a low placental O2 environment provides a link between the
placenta, in terms of the nature of shed syncytial knots and induction of
endothelial cell activation.
Methods: 1st trimester placental explants were cultured in 1% or 8% O2
environments and the number of shed syncytial knots quantiﬁed. Syncytial knots from the different conditions were added to endothelial cell
monolayers, and endothelial cell-surface ICAM-1 expression was
measured by ELISA. Cytokines were measured in endothelial cell conditioned medium by commercial ELISAs.
Results: There were no signiﬁcant differences in the number of syncytial
knots shed, nor in the secretion of IL-1b or IL-6 from explants cultured in
1% or 8% O2. The expression of ICAM-1 by endothelial cells that had been
cultured with syncytial knots shed from explants cultured in 1% or 8% O2
was also not signiﬁcantly different.
Discussion: Our data suggest that a low placental O2 environment does
not, cause a change in the nature of syncytial knots such that they induce
endothelial cell activation, nor in ,in the release of inﬂammatory mediators
from the placenta. Our results add to the growing evidence that a low
placental O2 environment may not an essential component contributing to
the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.
Keywords: hypoxia, trophoblast deportation, endothelium activation

A.57

Poster session 2 (P2.1 - P2.84)
[P2.1]
DECORIN IS A NOVEL VEGFR-2-BINDING ANTAGONIST FOR HUMAN
EXTRAVILLOUS TROPHOBLAST INVASION OF THE DECIDUA
P.K. Lala*1, G.V. Girish1, G.A. Khan1,2, N Lala1, 1Department of Anatomy and
Cell biology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A5C1,
Canada, 2Defende Institute of Physiology and Allied Health sciences, New
delhi 110054, India
Introduction and objectives: Extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs) of the
human placenta invade the uterine decidua and its arteries to ensure
adequate placental perfusion with maternal blood. Poor EVT invasion may
result in fetal growth restriction and maternal preeclampsia. We previously identiﬁed two decidua-derived molecules TGF-beta, and a TGF-betabinding proteoglycan decorin (DCN) as independent negative regulators of
EVT proliferation, migration and invasiveness. We reported that DCN acts
via multiple tyrosine kinase receptors EGF-R, IGFR-1 and VEGFR-2. Since
binding of DCN to VEGFR-2 has never been reported earlier, present study
explored the nature of this binding, the approximate molecular location of
VEGFR-2 binding site in the DCN core protein and its functional role in our
human ﬁrst trimester EVT cell line HTR-8/SVneo.
Methods and Results: Based on far-Western blotting and co-immunoprecipitation studies we report that DCN binds both native (EVT and
HUVEC-expressed) and recombinant VEGFR-2 and that this binding is
abrogated with a VEGFR-2 blocking antibody indicating an overlap
between the VEGF-binding and the DCN-binding domains of VEGFR-2. In
a radioligand binding assay conducted with intact EVTs we determined
that 125I-labeled VEGF-E (a VEGFR-2 speciﬁc ligand) binds EVTs with a Kd
of 566 pM, and DCN displaced this binding with a Ki of 5.78 nM, indicating
a 10 fold lower afﬁnity of DCN for VEGFR-2. DCN peptide fragments with
overlapping amino acid sequences derived from the LRR5 domain of DCN
that blocked the binding of DCN to VEGR-2 in EVT lysates also blocked
VEGF-induced EVT cell proliferation and migration, indicative of functional
VEGFR-2 binding sites of DCN. Finally, DCN inhibited VEGF-induced EVT
migration by interfering with ERK1/2 activation.
Conclusions: Our ﬁndings reveal a novel role of DCN as an antagonistic
ligand for VEGFR-2, having implications for pathophysiology of
preeclampsia, a trophoblast hypo-invasive disorder in pregnancy, and
explain its anti-angiogenic function. (Supported by grants of the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research to PKL).
Keywords: Extravillous trophoblast, Decorin, VEGF-receptor-2, Invasion

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.58

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.2]
SONOGRAPHIC FINDINGS ASSOCIATED WITH THE DIAGNOSIS OF
PLACENTA ACRRETA
GA Ramos*, V Tache, L Romine, R Eskander, K Benirschke, TR Moore,
University of California, San Diego, United States
Purpose: A number of sonographic signs have been described as indicative
of placenta accreta. The purpose of this study was to determine the relative
frequency and accuracy of these signs in predicting invasive placentation.
Methods: We performed a diagnostic accuracy study in which cases of
pathology-proven placenta accreta were compared to cases of placenta
previa matched by gestational age. Sonographic images were reviewed
and ultrasound signs of placenta accreta (previa, loss of myometrial
interface, chaotic intraplacental blood ﬂow, ‘swiss cheese appearance’,
placenta bulging into bladder, distance of bulge into the bladder, invasion
into the bladder, and color Doppler crossing vessels) were coded as
present, absent or indeterminate. The images were independently
reviewed by 3 physicians.
Results: Twenty-seven cases of pathology-proven accretas were identiﬁed
and compared to 54 cases of placenta previa between 2002 to 2008. Of the
acceta cases, 14 (52%) were accretas, 4 (15%) were incretas and 9 (33%)
were percretas. The frequency of the sonographic signs evaluated are
shown in Table 1. The most common and sensitive sonographic ﬁnding
associated with accreta was loss of myometrial interface. If present all
signs were highly speciﬁc (90-100%) and had a high positive predictive
value (90-100%) for the diagnosis of placenta accreta. Conversely the
negative predictive value of each of these signs was high ranging from 6898%. No combination of sonographic signs could accurately predict all
placenta percretas. However, placenta percretas often had more than one
sonographic sign.
Conclusions: The presence of a previa with loss of myometrial interface is
the most common ﬁnding in patients with accreta.
Table 1. Frequencies of the nine sonographic signs associated with placenta
accreta.
Previa Loss of
Crossing
Myometrial vessels
Interface
All
98%
patients
(N¼81)
Previas
100%
(N¼54)
Accretas
93%
(N¼27)

Chaotic Bladder ‘Swiss
Bladder
Blood
bulge
cheese
invasion
Flow
appearance’

30%

23%

28%

25%

21%

19%

0%

0%

0%

4%

0%

0%

89%

70%

85%

67%

63%

56%

[P2.3]
IN VITRO STUDY OF METALLOPROTEASES DURING THE HUMAN
DECIDUALIZATION PROCESS
Maria Agustina Vaccarezza*, Georgina Cerchi, Paula Cameo, Universidad
Maimonides. Centro de Estudios Biomedicos, Biotecnologicos Ambientales
y Diagostico, Argentina
During pregnancy decidua, maternal face, regulates the nutrition of the
embryo, the immune response and the restriction of invasion, generating
an intra-uterine environment appropriate to the success of pregnancy. The
correct formation of the decidua is essential in the process of implantation,
placentation and embryonic development. It has been shown the role of
metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in the process of decidualization (1,
2, 3, 4). We studied the activity and expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9, as
well as the expression of TIMP-2 during human in vitro decidualization
process. We used primary cultures of human uterine ﬁbroblasts (HuF) from
normal term placentae. The cells were cultured and in vitro decidualizated
in the presence of hormones and cAMP. The activity of MMPs was analyzed
by zymography in culture supernatant. We observed a signiﬁcant increase
in proMMP-2 activity, compared to control, during decidualization. On the
other hand, no changes were observed in the activity of MMP-2. The low
activity of MMP-9 observed in these conditions did not allow analysis by
densitometry of gels. The expression of MMPs and TIMP-2 was analyzed by
immuno-blot in cell extract. The expression of proMMP-2 was up regulated in treated cells, compared to control. No changes were observed in
the expression of MMP-2 and TIMP-2. We neither observed changes in the
expression of proMMP-9 and MMP-9. We used a commercial ELISA kit to
measure levels of MMP-2 in culture supernatants. The levels of MMP-2
were seen augmented in decidualization, compared to control. These
results show the speciﬁc regulation of proMMP-2 during the process of
decidualization. It is necessary to analyze in further studies the regulation
and the participation of the proMMP-2 as an inducer or as a result of this
process.
Funding: Universidad Maimonides, PICT2006-1523
1. Hu J, et al. BOR 2004;71(5):1598-604.
2. Rechtman M.P, et al. J Reprod Fertil 1999;117(1):169-77.
3. Alexander C.M, et al. Development 1996;122:1723-1736.
4. Stakova Z, et al. Endocrinology 2003; 144(12):5339-5346.
Keywords: Metalloproteinases, Decidualization Process, Decidua,
Placentae

Keywords: Placenta Accreta, Ultrasound, Diagnosis

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.4]
ACTIVITY AND EXPRESSION OF MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASES IN AN
IN VITRO CO-CULTURE MODEL
G Cerchi*, A Vaccarezza, P Cameo, CEBBAD-Universidad Maimonides,
Argentina

A.59

[P2.5]
DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSION AND LOCALIZATION OF DECORIN AND
BIGLYCAN IN HUMAN NORMAL TERM PLACENTA AND IN HIGHLY INVASIVE PATHOLOGIES
A.U. Borbely*1, S. Daher2, R. Mattar2, S.Y. Sun2, E. Bevilacqua1, S.F. Oliveira1,
Department of Developmental and Cellular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Obstetrics,
Federal University of Sao Paulo, Brazil
1

Successful implantation is the end result of complex molecular interactions between the hormonally primed uterus and a mature blastocyst.
Human reproduction is relatively inefﬁcient, of the pregnancies that are
lost, 75 percent represent a failure of implantation (1). Ethical restrictions
and limited availability of human placental tissue limits the possibilities of
human implantation studies (2). In vitro culture systems, within their
limitations, have proved to be useful in elucidating some of the important
molecules involved in implantation and decidualization (3). We proposed
to use an in vitro co-culture model of human uterine ﬁbroblast (Huf cells)
with trophoblast explants to study materno-fetal interaction. The aim of
this study was to evaluate matrix metalloproteases' (MMPs) protein
expression and activity, because they are principal responsible in remodelling the extracellular matrix during implantation process. In this model
HuF cells and trophoblast were obtained from human term plancentae.
Western blot analysis was carried out on HuF cells and trophoblast
explants to study the protein expression of MMP-2 at 21th day of culture.
Gel zymography was used to detect the proteolytic activity of MMP-2 and
-9 at the different conditions of culture, at several times: 4, 8, 12, 16 and 20
days. The protein expression of pro-MMP-2 was up-regulated in HuF cells
after co-culture with trophoblast compared with controls; on the contrary,
protein expression of MMP-2 was down-regulated. In trophobast explants
that had been in contact with HuF cells, the protein expression of MMP-2
was up-regulated. The activity of pro-MMP-2 and MMP-2 were up-regulaled in co-culture condition compared with controls (p<0,005). In
contrast, the activity of MMP-9 was down-regulated (p<0,005). The model
proposed in this work is a good tool for further studying the role of MMPs
during the implantation process.
References
1. Norwitz E. R., et al.. N Engl J Med 2001; 345(19):1400–1408.
2. Staun-Ram E., and E. Shalev. Reprod biol and endocrinology 2005; 3:56.
3. Jasinska A., et al.. J Soc Gynecol Investig 2004; 11(6):399-405.
Keywords: implantation, co-culture model, matrix metalloproteinases

Introduction: Decorin and biglycan are members of the small leucine-rich
proteoglycans (SLRP) family and are important factors in the control of
cellular proliferation, migration and invasion. Several placental pathologies include increased invasive activity of the trophoblast. These pathologies can be lethal for both mother and fetus and, they can be developed
during gestation as placenta accreta and invasive mole or after gestation,
like classic choriocarcinoma. The aim of this study was to characterize the
differential expression and localization of decorin and biglycan in normal
term placenta, placenta accreta, invasive mole and choriocarcinoma.
Methods: Characterization of the samples were done and the localization
of decorin and biglycan was performed using immunohistochemistry.
Results: In normal term placenta, decidual cells presented positivity for
decorin whereas the extravillous cytotrophoblast cells (EVT) were negative. Decorin was weakly stained in decidual matrix, however, the matrixtype ﬁbrinoid was not reactive. In placenta accreta and invasive mole, EVT
were positive for decorin whereas its surrounding matrix was negative. In
choriocarcinoma, only cytotrophoblast cells and metastatic cells were
immunoreactive for decorin, including mitotic ﬁgures of cytotrophoblast
cells. On the other hand, biglycan showed similar results to decorin reaction in almost all cases, with exception of the matrix-type ﬁbrinoid in
normal term placenta and the EVT surrounding matrix in placenta accreta,
which presented strong staining for biglycan.
Discussion: These results demonstrated that decorin and biglycan are
differentially expressed in normal term placenta and in placental pathologies. These results suggest that the expression patterns of biglycan in
highly invasive cells from placenta accreta, invasive mole and choriocarcinoma might play a role in modulating trophoblast migration and invasion. Also, the expression pattern presented by decorin suggests that this
proteoglycan might exert another role than migration/invasion
modulation.
Financial Support: CNPq
Keywords: Biglycan, Decorin, Extravillous Cytotrophoblast, Placental
Pathologies

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.60

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.6]
HYPERGLYCOSYLATED HCG IS A MARKER OF EARLY HUMAN TROPHOBLAST INVASION
J Guibourdenche1,3, T Fournier*1,2 et al, 1Inserm, France, 2Université Paris
Descartes, France, 3AP-HP, France
Context: Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is the major pregnancy
glycoprotein hormone whose maternal concentration and glycan structure
change all along pregnancy. hCG is mainly secreted by the syncytiotrophoblast covering the chorionic villi but little is known about the source
of hyperglycosylated hCG (hCG-H) production.
Objective: To analyze expression and secretion of hCG and hCG-H, in vitro
during human trophoblastic cell differentiation, in situ in ﬁrst trimester
placentas and in maternal sera during early pregnancy.
Design: hCG and hCG-H were measured in cell supernatants from primary
cultures of ﬁrst trimester placenta trophoblastic cells, which differentiate
in vitro into syncytiotrophoblast or invasive extravillous cytotrophoblasts
(evct). hCG-H immunodetection were performed on 9 WG placental tissue
sections. Total hCG and hCG-H were quantiﬁed by chemiluminometric
assay in 539 maternal sera collected between 9 and 19 WG during normal
pregnancies.
Results: In vitro, hCG secretion reached 37 ng/mL/mg DNA during syncytiotrophoblast formation, but contained few hCG-H (2 to 5 % of total hCG).
In contrast, hCG secretion (20 ng/mL/mg DNA) in evct supernatants
contained 10 to 20 % hCG-H. In situ, hCG-H immunostaining was strong in
invasive and endovascular evct, weaker in mononucleated villous cytotrophoblasts but negative in the syncytiotrophoblast. In maternal sera,
hCG-H concentrations continuously decreased during pregnancy from
406222 ng/mL at 9 WG to 86 ng/mL at 19 WG, whereas total hCG picked
at 11WG and then decreased.
Conclusions: This study suggests that the high levels of hCG-H observed in
ﬁrst trimester maternal sera are mainly from invasive evct origin, reﬂecting the early trophoblast invasion process.
Keywords:
hCG,
trophoblast,
hCG-H,
invasive
extravillous
cytotrophoblasts

[P2.7]
A ROLE FOR NOTCH SIGNALLING IN HUMAN TROPHOBLAST INVASION
Jürgen Pollheimer*, Sandra Haider, Martin Knöﬂer, Medical University of
Vienna, Austria
Background: Notch signalling, a highly conserved pathway, regulates
numerous cellular processes such as stem cell maintenance, cell fate
decision, apoptosis, proliferation and invasion, thus representing an
interesting study object in the context of trophoblast differentiation.
Activation of Notch signalling occurs via cleavage of Notch receptors (1-4)
upon binding to the neighbouring cell associated transmembrane ligands
jagged1/2 and Dll1/3/4. Subsequently, the Notch intracellular domain
(NICD) tanslocates to the nucleus, where it binds to the transcription factor
RBPJk and initiates target gene transcription such as HEY and HES family
members. While mouse knock-out studies suggest an important role for
Notch signalling in placental development, importance of the signalling
cascade in the human placenta remains elusive.
Objective: Firstly, we determined the expression pattern of Notch receptors and ligands in the human placenta by performing several descriptive
methods. Secondly, we sought to gain ﬁrst insights into the activity and
function of Notch signalling in human trophoblast invasion.
Methods: Protein and mRNA were isolated from placental villi, decidual
tissue and ﬁbroblasts, primary ﬁrst trimester cytotrophoblasts and extravillous trophoblasts as well as trophoblast cell lines to perform RT-PCR and
Western Blot analyses. Moreover, using speciﬁc antibodies we analyzed
expression patterns of Notch receptors and ligands in tissue sections of
ﬁrst trimester placentae. Notch activity was studied in the trophoblast cell
line SGHPL-5 using a luciferase reporter plasmid containing RBPJk binding
sites. HES activation was investigated upon overexpression of NICD of
Notch1 in SGHPL-5 cells. Migration/invasion was studied by titrating the
Notch inhibitor DAPT into invasion assays and differentiating villous
explant cultures.
Results: Descriptive analyses revealed a broad expression pattern of both
Notch receptors and ligands in placental tissue, primary isolated trophoblasts and trophoblast cell lines. Interestingly, immunohistochemical
analyses showed a prominent staining for the Notch receptors 1-3 in cell
columns of ﬁrst trimester human placentae. The RBPJk reporter assay
revealed basal Notch activity in SGHPL-5 cells which was further enhanced
by overexpression of NICD. Finally, inhibition of Notch signalling by DAPT
resulted in an increase of the invasive capacity of both, SGHPL-5 cells and
ﬁrst trimester explants cultures.
Conclusion: Based on our descriptive and functional analyses we propose
a novel role for Notch signalling in trophoblast differentiation by negatively regulating the invasive capacity of EVT.
J.P. is supported by grant Nr. P-22687-B13 of the Austrian Science Funds,
Austria
Keywords: trophoblast, invasion, Notch signalling

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.8]
A NOVEL ROLE FOR PAR6 IN TROPHOBLAST CELL FUSION
T.S. Sivasubramaniyam*1,2, I. Caniggia1, 1Mount Sinai Hospital, Canada,
2
University of Toronto, Canada
Introduction: Human placental development is dependent upon the
establishment of proper trophoblast cell differentiation events including
fusion and invasion, shaping proper organogenesis. This study examines
the contribution of polarity to trophoblast cell fusion, an area of research
which remains elusive, by examining Par6 (Partitioning defective protein
6), a key regulator of cell polarity.
Methods: Human placental tissues across gestation, preeclamptic
placentae and age-matched controls were collected. To establish a role for
Par6 in trophoblast fusion, primary isolated trophoblast cells were
cultured at 3% and 20% oxygen and Par6 expression was examined spatially
and temporally in conjunction with a polarity marker, Zona Occludin-1
(ZO-1). Par6 expression was assessed following forskolin treatment in
BeWo cells. Par6 siRNA strategy was employed in BeWo cells and ZO1expression was examined. Additionally, the role of Par6 on trophoblast
fusion was assessed by examining fusogenic marker, GCM1 following Par6
silencing.
Results: Early in gestation, Par6 localized mainly to the nuclei of cytotrophoblasts while, with advancing gestation, Par6 expression increased
and its localization shifted to the cytoplasm where it was found at the
interface between cytotrophoblasts and syncytium. In primary trophoblast
cells, Par6 levels were increased after 48 hours of exposure to 3% O2 and
localized to tight junctions while at 20%, Par6 expression remained cytoplasmic. Silencing Par6 in BeWo cells resulted in a disruption of ZO-1
localization and this was associated with an increase in GCM-1 expression.
Following forskolin treatment, Par6 expression decreased which was
associated with an increase in syncytin expression. Interestingly, Par6
expression was decreased in preeclampsia relative to age-matched
controls.
Discussion: These ﬁndings provide novel insights into a role for Par6 in
regulating trophoblast cell fusion via its effect on polarity during human
placental development which may be disrupted and contribute to the
pathogenesis of preeclampsia. (Supported by CIHR and OWH/IGH).
Keywords: polarity, fusion, oxygen, Par6

A.61

[P2.9]
ISOLATION, CULTURE AND CHARACTERIZATION OF EXTRAVILLOUS
TROPHOBLAST CELLS FROM TERM PLACENTA: A DIFFERENT APPROACH
K.M. Prado*, A.U. Borbely, I.R. Fernandes, S. Sandri, S. Correa-Silva, E.
Bevilacqua, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil
Introduction: The extravillous trophoblast cells (EVT) are a heterogeneous
cell population exhibiting different phenotypes and functions. These cells
are essentials for the correct attachment and development of placenta, and
consequently, for the fetal development as well. In normal term placenta,
the majority of the cells that comprise the cytotrophoblast shell at the
basal plate undergoes apoptosis and are replaced by ﬁbrinoid. However, in
the deeper layer of the term placenta, some viable EVT cells can be found.
According to previous studies, these cells are capable of maintaining its
invasive and biochemical properties, which could provide a good model
system.
Methods: Fragments of the extravillous region of term placenta was
carefully dissected from villi, digested and the EVT cells were separated by
several centrifugation processes using a Percoll gradient. After, the EVT
cells were cultured for 24, 48, and 72h. The characterization of the cultures
were done using antibody markers such as human leucocyte antigen G
(HLA-G), cytokeratin 7, human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG), vimentin,
placental alkaline phosphatase and placental growth factor (PlGF).
Results: The culture of EVT cells was best suited at 48h, containing cells
with typical trophoblast phenotype. The great majority of the cultured
cells (95%) exhibited cytokeratin-7, HLA-G, placental alkaline phosphatase
and PlGF reactive cells, whereas the remaining 5% were HCG or vimentin
positive cells.
Discussion: The current protocol of EVT cell isolation and culture can be
considered as an efﬁcient model system that can be useful for the study of
third trimester EVT cells, providing an alternative method for villous
explant-derived EVT cells. Further studies are ongoing to conﬁrm whether
these cells still have an invasive potential. In addition, it is a new opportunity to study EVT cells in countries where the use of ﬁrst trimester
placenta is unlawful.
Financial support: CAPES, CNPq and FAPESP 56780-6/08.
Keywords: Extravillous Trophoblast Cells, Term Placenta, Culture, Cellular
Characterization

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.62

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.10]
INCREASED EXPRESSION OF BCL-2 DURING INTERCELLULAR FUSION OF
BEWO CHORIOCARCINOMA

[P2.11]
HB-EGF AND HER-1 SIGNALING STIMULATE EXTRAVILLOUS TROPHOBLAST INVASION

N.S. Rote*, C. Xu, L. Luo, B-R Wei, Case Western Reserve University, United
States

CE Dunk*1, JK Wright1,2, C Maxwell3, S Keating4, SJ Lye1,2, 1Womens’ and
Infant's Health Research Centre, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute,
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada, 2Department of Physiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 3Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 4Department of
Pathology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Development of the human syncytiotrophoblast from mononuclear villous
cytotrophoblast results in increased resistance to apoptosis. We previously
reported that forskolin-induced differentiation and syncytialization of the
BeWo cell line resulted in increased expression of both protein and mRNA
for the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 and increased resistance to apoptosis.
However, in cells treated with solvent alone approximately 10% underwent
spontaneous intercellular fusion, and in forskolin-treated cells approximately 20% did not fuse. We investigated whether increased expression of
Bcl-2 was a result of forskolin-induced differentiation or the result of
syncytialization. BeWo treated with DMSO or with forskolin for 72 hr were
evaluated by immunoﬂuorescence with antibody against E-cadherin to
identify fused cells, antibody against Bcl-2, and nuclear staining with DAPI.
Staining with anti-Bcl-2 was quantiﬁed and expressed as ﬂuorescent
intensity. The intensity of staining for Bcl-2 was similar (P ¼ NS) in
mononuclear cells from cultures treated with DMSO (77.6  12.0) or
forskolin (75.2  9.6). Compared with mononuclear cells, staining for Bcl-2
was signiﬁcantly increased by 17% in spontaneously fused cells in
DMSO-treated cultures (90.4  12.3; P < 0.01) and by 30% in fused cells in
forskolin-treated cultures (97.5  15.0; P < 0.01). Forskolin treatment
enhanced the production of Bcl-2 by 8% in fused cells (P < 0.05). Thus,
increased production of Bcl-2 in BeWo appears to be related more closely
to syncytialization, whether spontaneous or forskolin-induced, than to
differentiation.
Keywords: Bcl-2, BeWo, intercellular fusion

The EGF receptors HER1 and HER2 are differentially expressed during
extravillous trophoblast (EVT) invasion. We have previously shown that
the ability of Decidual conditioned medium to induce invasive EVT
differentiation was abrogated in the presence of the HER-1 antagonist,
AG1478 yet the HER1 ligand EGF does not induce migration and invasion of
either Jar cells or primary explant EVT. This study examines the role of
HER-1 phosphorylation and downstream signaling and the differential
effects of EGF and HBEGF in the differentiation and invasion of EVT.
The Jar choriocarcinoma cell line and placental villous explants were used
as experimental models and immunohistochemical assessment of protein
markers of EVT differentiation (decreased HER-1, Cx40, and increased HER2) was performed. Western blotting, multiplex phosphorylation and
migration assays were performed to assess the role of EGF and HBEGF
mediated activation of HER1 and the downstream signaling pathways in
trophoblast invasion.
In contrast to EGF, HBEGF treatment downregulates Cx40, regulates the
HER-1/2 switch and also induces a potent dose dependant migration of
both Jar cells and explant EVT in a manner that is inhibited by both AG1478
or AG825 (HER2 inhibitor). Western blot analysis of HER-1 activation
demonstrated that HBEGF stimulates a rapid time dependant phosphorylation of HER1 at both the Tyr992 and Tyr1068 site, leading to sustained
downstream activation of the MAP kinase and PI3 Kinase/ Akt signaling
pathways. In contrast EGF activates HER-1 Tyr1045 , a site associated with
ubiquintination and degradation of HER-1, and does not activate downstream pathways. Real time invasion assays using a panel of signaling
pathway inhibitors conﬁrmed that HBEGF mediated migration was
dependent on the PI3K/Akt pathway.
These results demonstrate that HBEGF activation of the HER-1 signaling
through PI3 Kinase and subsequent activation of Akt and GSK3 a/b is an
important component of EVT invasion.
Funded by: CIHR IHD165436
Keywords: HB-EGF, HER-1, Extravillous Trophoblast, Signaling

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.63

[P2.12]
OXYSTEROLS INHIBIT TROPHOBLAST SYNCYTIALISATION BY ACTIVATING THE LIVER X RECEPTORS

[P2.13]
SYNCYTIN AND ITS RECEPTOR ASCT2 HAVE AN INFLUENCE ON THE
FUSION ACTIVITY IN HUMAN PLACENTAL BEWO CELLS

IL Aye*, BJ Waddell, PJ Mark, JA Keelan, University of Western Australia,
Australia

Takahiro Nobuzane*, Satoshi Matsuyama, Yoshiki Kudo, Hiroshima
University, Japan

Objectives: Oxygenated cholesterol metabolites known as oxysterols
display potent biological activities ranging from regulation of lipid
homeostasis to cytotoxic and pro-apoptotic effects, and have been linked
to lipid disorders such as atherosclerosis. Oxysterols have previously been
shown to inhibit invasion of ﬁrst trimester trophoblasts, an effect which
involves activation of the nuclear Liver X-receptor (LXR), suggesting a link
between oxysterols and preeclampsia. In this study, we investigated the
effects of several oxysterols on trophoblast syncytialisation (differentiation
and fusion) in term placental trophoblasts.
Methods: Primary trophoblast cells were isolated from term placentas by
dispase enzyme digestion, puriﬁed over a discontinuous Percoll gradient,
and allowed to syncytialise in vitro. Trophoblast cells were treated with
various oxysterols [25-hydroxycholesterol (25-OHC), 7-ketocholesterol
(7-ketoC), 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol (22R-OHC)] and the synthetic LXR
agonist (T0901317) at non-toxic doses, with or without pre-treatment with
LXR antagonist geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP). Trophoblast differentiation was monitored by measuring GCM-1 mRNA expression (after 12
hours by quantitative-PCR), hCG secretion (after 48 hours by ELISA) and
placental alkaline phosphatase activity (after 48 hours by phosphatase
assay), while cell fusion was determined by E-cadherin immunostaining
(after 48 hours) and quantiﬁcation of syncytialised nuclei.
Results: Trophoblast differentiation and fusion were both signiﬁcantly
inhibited by all oxysterols used in this study. GCM-1 expression was
reduced between 30–50 %, hCG secretion between 20–35 %, alkaline
phosphatase activity between 15–25 % and cell fusion between 30–50 %.
The synthetic LXR agonist T0901317 also potently inhibited trophoblast
differentiation and fusion. Moreover, treatment with the LXR antagonist
GGPP abrogated the inhibitory effects of oxysterols and T0901317 on
trophoblast syncytialisation.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings suggest that oxysterols impair differentiation
and fusion of term trophoblast cells via an LXR-dependent mechanism.
Excessive oxysterol exposure may impair placental formation and regeneration via inhibition of syncytialisation, thereby contributing to placental
pathologies.
Keywords: LXR, oxysterols, differentiation, syncytialisation

Introduction: Syncytin, the human endogenous retrovirus envelope
proteins, is highly expressed in the placental syncytiotrophoblast layer and
contributes to placental trophoblast fusion. ASCT2 is a syncytin receptor
and known to be identiﬁed as the amino acid transporter B0. To investigate
the role of syncytin and ASCT2 on fusion activity, we use RNA interference
technique in human placental BeWo cells.
Methods: BeWo cells was treated with siRNA for syncytin-1 and ASCT2,
and then incubated with forskolin to become fusion. The effect of those
speciﬁc siRNA treatments on the expression of mRNA and protein was
evaluated by means of real-time RT-PCR and western blotting, respectively.
The cell-fusion activity was evaluated by ﬂow-cytometry and hCG
secretion.
Results: The expression of both mRNA and protein of syncytin-1 and
ASCT2 was reduced after incubation of its speciﬁc siRNA treatment. The
secretion of hCG was also reduced after treatment with siRNA for syncytin
and ASCT2, but the fusion activity was reduced only after treatment with
siRNA for ASCT2 signiﬁcantly.
Discussion: This result suggests that syncytin has a different effect on
fusion activity and hCG secretion compared with ASCT2 in BeWo cells.
Keywords: cell fusion, syncytin, ASCT2
[P2.14]
ADAM12IN MOUSE PLACENTA
M Weber1, S San Martín2, UR Markert*1, JS Fitzgerald1, 1University Hospital
Jena, Germany, 2Universidad de Valparaiso, Chile
Background: ADAM12 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain 12;
meltrin a) is a catalytically active metalloprotease and disintegrin which
plays a role in myoblast fusion and osteoclast formation. In the placenta,
ADAM12 has multiple functions, one of which seems to be regulation of
trophoblast fusion. Therefore, we analyzed the development of mouse
placenta from day 5 to 11 of pregnancy.
Methods: We analyzed mouse placenta from different days of pregnancy
(5-11). Tissue was ﬁxed in paraformaldehyd and processed for immunoperoxidase staining for detection of ADAM-12 with NovaRed.
Results: ADAM12 was detectable in all samples in maternal tissue. We also
detected ADAM12 at day 8 of pregnancy in trophoblast cells invasion
starting. At day 11 the signal is in the labyrinth and trohpoblast cell of
placenta.
Discussion: ADAM12 is expressed in uterine tissue. It appears in trophoblast cells when invasion is initiated and again in further advanced
trophoblast cells, which might be prepared for fusion and loss of
invasiveness.
Conclusion: ADAM12 may be involved in regulation of trophoblast
behaviour.
Keywords: murine placenta, invasion, ADAM12, trophoblast

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.64

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.15]
PIAS1/3 EXPRESSION KINETICS IN MOUSE PLACENTA
M Weber1, S San Martín2, R Ramirez2, JS Fitzgerald1, UR Markert*1,
1
University Hospital Jena, Germany, 2Universidad de Valparaiso, Chile
Background: The JAK/STAT pathway is one of the important intracellular
signaling cascades which is involved in several trophoblast functions
including invasion, migration and proliferation. A major group of its
negative regulators are PIAS (Protein Inhibitors of Activated STATs). PIAS1
was identiﬁed as a speciﬁc inhibitor for STAT1 and PIAS3 speciﬁcally
associates with STAT3. PIAS proteins bind to activated STAT dimers and
prevent them from translocation into the nucleus and from binding DNA.
Methods: We analyzed mouse placentae from different days of pregnancy
(5-11). Tissue was ﬁxed in paraformaldehyd and processed for immunoperoxidase staining for detection of PIAS1 and PIAS3 with NovaRed.
Results: A low signal of PIAS1/3 is detectable in maternal tissues at all days
of pregnancy. At day 11 of pregnancy, PIAS1/3 appears also in the labyrinth
of the placenta.
Discussion: PIAS1 and PIAS3 are inhibitors of STAT1 and STAT3 and,
thereby, inhibitors of invasion. Their appearance at day 11 in the labyrinth
coincides with reduced trophoblast invasiveness.
Conclusion: Our observation of state of pregnancy-dependent PIAS1/3
expression underlines the involvement in regulation of placentation
Keywords: murine placenta, trophoblast, PIAS, JAK/STAT signalling
[P2.16]
PLACENTAL ALTERATIONS IN ACUTE CADMIUM INTOXICATION
MC Díaz1, CN Zanuzzi2, NV Gónzalez2, S Gómez1, M Quiroga1, CG Barbeito*2
et al, 1Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias UNCPBA, Argentina, 2Facultad de
Ciencias Veterinarias UNLP, Argentina
Cadmium (Cd) is an environmental polutant that produces cronic intoxications afecting fetus and placenta. However, accidental exposure of
human and domestic animals in industrial areas causes acute intoxications. In the present work the effect of a single 10 mg/kg Cd dose on fetuses
and placentas was studied. Uteri, placentas and fetuses from 20 days of
pregnancy Wistar rats were employed. CdCl2 single doses at days 4, 7, 10 or
15 of pregnancy were administered. Control females received saline. The
number of viable individuals and embrionary resorptions were registered.
Placental and fetuses samples were excised to measure Cd concentration.
Some placentas were processed for the following techniques: H&E, PAS,
Masson, picrosirius and lectinhistochemistry. Fetuses were stained with
Alizarine red and H&E. Experimental groups rendered higher values of
resorptions and fetal malformations. Cd concentration values were
signiﬁcantly higher in experimental placentas and fetuses. Congestion of
laberintic blood vessels and coagulative necrosis were observed in
placentas from Cd-treated females, particularly in the seventh day of
pregnancy. A colagen type III increase was determined in placentas from
intoxicated dams. Regarding lectinhistochemistry, a higher trophoblastic
SBA and DBA binding was detected revealing an augmentation of galactose
and galactosamine. A fucose decrease was detected by UEA-1. Sections
incubated with BSA-1 and microwaved allowed the discrimination of fetal
blood vessels and maternal lacunae to perform estereological examination
that resulted in a vascular volumen decrease in intoxicated groups.
Placental changes found may be the cause of the resorptions and fetal
alterations observed. These results clearly demonstrate the risk for female
to high Cd concentration exposure during pregnancy.
Keywords: Cadmium, lectinhistochemistry, stereology, rat

[P2.17]
EFFECTS OF CARBAMAZEPINE ON THE PLACENTA AND ON THE EMBRYO
DEVELOPMENT
S.U. OLIVA1,2, A.K. VIDSIUNAS*1,3, P.A. RINALDO1, R.M. ENGELBRECHT2, S.M.
MIRAGLIA2, 1Centro Universitário São Camilo, Brazil, 2Universidade Federal
de São Paulo, Brazil, 3Universidade Nove de Julho, Brazil
Carbamazepine (CBZ) is largely used in the treatment of trigeminal
neuralgia, affective disturbs and, especially as an anticonvulsive drug,
which is prescribed for pregnant women who need receive CBZ continuously to avoid convulsive crises and intra-uterine fetal hypoxia. CBZ passes
throughout the hematoplacental membrane and may impairs the embryo
development and affects the placenta itself. The aim of this project is to
investigate and evaluate some of the morphological alterations on the
embryo and the placenta observed on the CBZ treated rats. Normal cycling
sexually mature healthy nuliparous Wistar strain rats (UNIFESP, São Paulo,
Brazil), three months of age, 250 g of weight, were acclimated under
laboratory conditions (12h light, 12h dark, 26 C). They were provided feed
and water ad libitum. They have been divided into three groups of four
animals each and all females have received 20mg/Kg/day, i.p of CBZ as
follows: The ﬁrst group (T8) has daily received CBZ from the 8th to 12th
day of pregnancy (dop); the second group (T12) from the 12th to 20th dop
and; the third group (T15) from the 15th to 20th dop. Animals from control
group have received propylene glycol vehicle. On the 20th dop, uterine
horns and ovaries have been collected, weighed and macroscopic analysed.
Besides, corpora lutea, embryo implantation sites, dead and alive fetuses
and resorption sites have been counted and weighted as well. Placenta has
been dissected, weighed, ﬁxed in Bouin's liquid for 24h and conventionally
processed for the hematoxylin and eosin staining. Preliminary results
point increase of resorption index, decrease of both fetal and placenta
weights on the CBZ treated rats from groups T8 and T12. Besides, the
survival index for live fetuses has been also diminished and those which
survived have not shown external and internal malformations, and visceral
anomalies due to CBZ treatment. The placenta morphology from T8 group
has shown its deciduas basalis disorganized, in which some decidual cells
have presented signs of apoptosis. The CBZ toxicity on the embryo
development and, mainly, on the placenta morphology must be better
investigated.
Keywords: carbamazepine, decidua basalis, embryo resorption, placenta
weight

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.65

[P2.18]
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL STUDY OF VEGF EXPRESSION WITHIN THE
PLACENTAL LABYRINTH OF MICE CHRONICALLY EXPOSED TO PARTICULATE AIR POLLUTION DURING PREGNANCY

[P2.19]
GESTATIONAL EXPOSURE TO URBAN PARTICULATE AIR POLLUTION
AFFECTS GLYCOGEN CELLS VOLUME IN THE JUNCTIONAL ZONE OF
THE MURINE PLACENTA

M.M. Veras*1, M.A. Peres1, P.H.N. Saldiva1, M. Dolhnikoff1, E.G. Caldini2,
1
Laboratory of Experimental Air Pollution- University of São Paulo, Brazil,
2
Laboratory of Cell Biology- University of São Paulo, Brazil

J.N. Scoriza2, M.A. Peres1, P.H.N. Saldiva1, E.G. Caldini2, M.M. Veras*1,
Laboratory of Experimental air Pollution- Schoo of Medicine, university of
Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Laboratory of Cell Biology - School of medicine,
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil

Within the placenta the fetal vasculature and the trophoblast must
develop in such a way as to ensure that sufﬁcient capacity for exchange
occurs between fetal and maternal circulations. Thus, factors that affect
placental development and function will have impacts on fetal growth and
survival. We have previously demonstrated that chronic exposure to
particulate air pollution during gestation resulted in morphological
changes in the placenta. Among these must be considered smaller
maternal blood space volumes and calibers on the maternal side of the
placenta and greater surface area of fetal capillaries. Placental VEGF
expression promotes endothelial cell proliferation, vascular permeability
and is indirectly involved in the induction of trophoblast development.
Under hypoxic conditions, placental expression of VEGF is up-regulated.
We hypothesized that the observed changes in placental morphology
associated to exposure to PM during gestation could be associated to
altered placental VEGF levels. To test this, mice were maintained for two
generations in exposure chambers situated close to a busy street of trafﬁc
in São Paulo. Two groups of 6 females were raised and completed pregnancies in normobaric chambers with exclusively ﬁltered (F) or nonﬁltered (NF) air. The 24-hr concentration of particulate matter (PM2.5)
inside the chambers was determined gravimetrically. At 18 days of
gestation, female mice were euthanized and 1 placenta from each female
removed, ﬁxed in formalin, embedded in parafﬁn for microscopical
examination. Placental morphology was assessed by stereological methods
and VEGF expressions were analyzed via immunohistochemistry. Immunoreactivity was measured as total volume of positive stained tissue
within the labyrinth. Results showed that in the labyrinth of animals
exposed to particulate pollution the VEGF immunoreactivity are increased
(mean (SD) mm3; F¼ 0.0062 (0.002), NF¼ 0.0091 (0.001) mm3, p<0.03),
and we did not observe any preferential distribution of VEGF. In conclusion, these preliminary results suggest that the exposure to particulate air
pollution during pregnancy elicits an increased expression of VEGF, indicating that the ambient levels of air pollution alter mechanisms that
regulate endothelial proliferation.
Keywords: Air pollution, placenta development, VEGF

1

Adverse pregnancy outcomes are associated with exposure to urban air
pollution (UAP). We have shown that gestational exposure to UAP result in
changes in functional morphology of the murine placenta. Decreases in
fetal weight of exposed animals were accompanied by decreases in the
volume of the maternal blood space, increases in the surface area of fetal
capillaries (FC) and in the total diffusive conductance of the intervascular
barrier(IVB). The changes seen in pregnancies associated with UAP is
surprising in the sense that some seem to be adaptive and others deleterious. Greater surface area of FC, total diffusive conductance and massspeciﬁc conductance of the IVB may be seen as fetoplacental adaptations
serving to maintain and expand oxygen and nutrient delivery to the foetus.
The fact that foetal weight declines despite these adaptations implies that
other factors exert inﬂuential effects. Although the function of glycogen
cells (GC) in the placenta remains to be fully explained, some authors
believe that placental glycogen stores are used as fuel for placental
consumption or to attend fetal demand in times of need. Thus we
hypothesized that changes in the GC content of the junctional zone(JZ)
could also be inﬂuenced by exposing pregnant mice to UAP. To test this,
mice were raised and completed pregnancies in chambers with exclusively
ﬁltered (F) or non-ﬁltered (NF) ambient air. At 18-days gestation, n¼4
placentas per group were weighed, ﬁxed, embedded in glycolmethacrylate
resin and stained for microscopical examination. Fields of view on vertical
uniform random slices were analysed stereologically by point counting.
Volume of JZ and CG were estimated. Group comparisons were drawn
using Student t test. Null hypotheses were rejected at P<0.05. Results are
summarised in Tables 1.
Table 1. Volume and volume density of JZ and GC of mice exposed to air
pollution (NF) or ﬁltered air (F).

Vol GC (cm3)
Vol of JZ (cm3)
Vol density of GC

Groups

N

Mean

SD

p

F
NF
F
NF
F
NF

4
4
4
4
4
4

0.0017
0.0035
0.019
0.021
0.092
0.166

0.0002
0.001
0.001
0.004
0.016
0.033

0.02
ns
0.007

Our data indicated that exposure to air pollution during pregnancy affects
the total volume of GC in the juctional zone thus indicating that in these
placentas the consumption of glycogen is lower or its accumulation is
increased. However, our study design did not allow us to identify which
mechanism was responsible for the changes.
Keywords: air pollution, glycogen cells, junctional zone

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.66

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.20]
PLACENTAL AND FETAL MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGES ASSOCIATED WITH
INGESTION OF MYKANIA GLOMERATA
Camila Mendes*1, Karollina Nascimento1, Miriam Faria1, Elfriede Bacchi2,
Suzana Moraes3, Estela Bevilacqua1, 1Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, Brazil, 2College of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, Brazil, 3Department of Morphology and Pathology,
Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of São Paulo, Brazil
Background: Mykania Glomerata, popularly known as “guaco” is a medicinal plant widely used by Latin American population for the treatment of
asthma, bronchitis and rheumatism. Phytochemical composition of the
guaco extracts includes ﬂavonoids, tannin and the coumarin, an anticoagulant agent. In spite of the beneﬁcial effects its toxicity has never been
assessed during pregnancy in a controlled investigation.
Objectives: This study aims to add baseline information on the biological
effects of Mykania Glomerata during pregnancy, using as indicators the
incidence of embryonic malformation and placental morphology.
Materials and methods: Macroscopic and skeletal analysis of fetuses and
microscopic analysis of term placenta from mice treated by gavage with
Mykania glomerata extract (600mg/30g) during the gestational days (gd) 7
to 11and 14 to 18, compared to control PBS-treated mice.
Results: When compared to the control group, the treated group exhibited
intra-uterine growth restriction and decrease in placental weight (p
<0.05); increase in skeletal and cranial-facial birth defects and increase in
the mortality rate (0.03  0.05 vs 0.26  0.15, p<0.05). Placental
morphological changes were suggestive of a functional placental deﬁcit
and included reduction in the ratio labyrinthine zone/junctional layer,
signiﬁcant increase of the glycogen cell population, invasion of these cells
into the labyrinthine and decidual zones and, increase in the apoptotic
index in the junctional layer.
Conclusion: Findings suggest caution in indiscriminate use of this phytotherapic during gestation.
Financial support: FAPESP.
Keywords: mykania glomerata, placenta, birth defects, abortion.

[P2.21]
STEREOLOGICAL STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF DIESEL EXHAUST EXPOSURE DURING PREGNANCY ON PLACENTAL DEVELOPMENT IN MICE PRELIMINARY RESULTS
MA Peres*, JN Scoriza, AJ Lichtenfels, EG Caldini, PHN Saldiva, MM Veras
et al, FM-USP, Brazil
We have previously shown that maternal exposure to current levels of
urban air pollution in São Paulo city may have deleterious effects on
murine reproductive health. Maternal exposure before and/or during
pregnancy affected fetal outcomes and the observed low birth weight was
associated with changes in functional morphology of the placenta. The
higher levels of air pollutants in São Paulo city are mainly due to low
quality diesel combustion emission (500ppm of sulfur). Therefore in this
study we investigated the effects of gestational exposure to diesel exhaust
on murine placental development. Animals (5 per group) were daily
exposed during pregnancy (0.5 dpc-12 dpc) to either ﬁltered air (F group)
or diesel exhaust (DE group) [550 mg/m3 of PM2.5 for 60 minutes/day]
using exposure chambers. At 12-days gestation, n¼5 placentas per group
were prepared for microscopical examination. Fields of view on vertical
uniform random slices were analysed stereologically. Volumes (V) of
placental compartments were estimated by the Cavalieri Method. No
signiﬁcant differences (p>0.05) were found between groups for any of the
placental compartments (table 1).
Table 1. Effects of diesel exposure on placental volumes (mm3)
Group

V Lab

V JZ

V Dec

V CP

V Total
placenta

V Total
placentaþDec

F

0.020
0.01
0.023
0.008

0.010
0.004
0.010
0.004

0.117
0.025
0.129
0.045

0.006
0.003
0.005
0.003

0.037
0.016
0.039
0.016

0.154
0.033
0.168
0.058

DE

Lab¼labyrinth; JZ¼junctional zone; Dec¼decidua basalis; CP¼chorionic
plate
Mice exposure to DE during pregnancy did not affect placental compartments development. However based on previous studies it is too soon to
discard the potential effects of DE exposure on placental development.
Changes in placenta morphology associated with exposure to ambient air
pollution were restricted to the ﬁne structure of the labyrinth. Detailed
analysis of labyrinth components and of the interhemal membrane are
necessary to conﬁrm or discard the negative effects of diesel exhaust
exposure on placental development.
Keywords: Air pollution, gestation, particulated matter, stereology

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.67

[P2.22]
EFFECTS OF THE PESTICIDE CHLORPYRIFOS ON IN-VITRO MODELS OF
TROPHOBLAST CELLS

[P2.23]
PRENATAL EXPOSURE TO SODIUM ARSENITE MODIFIES PLACENTAL
GLUCOSE TRANSPORTERS OF BALB/C MICE

M.E. Ridano*1, J. Flores-Martin1, G. Magnarelli2, S. Genti-Raimondi1, G.M.
Panzetta-Dutari1, 1Universidad Nacional de Cordoba, Argentina, 2LIBIQUIMA, Fac Ingeniería, Argentina

D.S. Gutiérrez-Torres1, E. Ramos-Martínez2, M.C. González-Horta1,
B. Sánchez-Ramírez*1, M. Levario-Carrillo3, L.M. Del Razo4 et al, 1Faculty of
Chemical Sciences. Autonomous University of Chihuahua State. Chihuahua,
Chih., Mexico, 2CIMA Hospital. Chihuahua, Chih., Mexico, 3Faculty of
Medicine. Autonomous University of Chihuahua State. Chihuahua, Chih.,
Mexico, 4CINVESTAV-IPN. México, D.F., Mexico

Environmental contaminants may disrupt trophoblast cell function and
differentiation changing the expression of speciﬁc genes. An increased risk
of spontaneous abortion, low weight offspring and intrauterine growth
restriction in pregnant women chronically exposed to organophosphate
(OP) pesticides has been reported. At present, the underlying mechanisms
involved in placental toxic effects are not fully understood. Recent studies
in other cell models indicate that OP toxic effects could be mediated
through alteration of transcription factors implicated in cell replication
and/or differentiation. Herein, we investigated whether Chlorpyrifos (Cp),
one of the most widely used OP pesticides, has any effect on genes
important for placental function. As an initial approach we employed the
choriocarcinoma-derived Jeg-3 cell line model. Cellular viability was
tested using the MTT assay and cell morphology was analyzed by
desmosome immunoﬂuorescencent localization and nuclei staining.
Expression of glial cell missing 1 (GCM1) and krüpple-like factor 6 (KLF6)
transcription factors, as well as human chorionic gonadotropin b-subunit
(hCGb) were determined by qRT-PCR. Jeg-3 cell viability exposed to
increasing Cp concentrations (up to 100 mM) for 24 and 48 h was always
greater than 75%. No major effect was observed on cell morphology, except
for an increase in the cell number with fragmented and/or condensed
nuclei. Cp treatment barely modiﬁed KLF6 expression, while it increased
hCGb and GCMa mRNA expression. These molecules are involved in
trophoblast differentiation and have been associated with hypoxia-related
placental pathologies. Our results suggest that placental Cp toxicity may be
due in part to its effect on trophoblast differentiation. We are extending
our study to in vitro differentiating cytotrophoblasts and placental
explants to conﬁrm this hypothesis. In sum, present data support the idea
that Cp modiﬁes placenta gene expression and could have implications for
understanding the adverse pregnancy outcomes associated with Cp
exposure in humans.
Supported by SACyT, CONICET, FONCyT, MinCyT of Córdoba and SECyTUNC.
Keywords: pesticides, gene expression, trophoblast

Chronic exposure to inorganic arsenic (iAs) has been associated with
disorders in reproductive function, producing spontaneous abortions,
premature birth, and intrauterine growth restriction. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the effects of prenatal exposure to NaAsO2 on the
morphology and the expression of placental transporters GLUT 1, GLUT 3
and GLUT 4. Female Balb/c mice were exposed orally from the 8th day of
gestation to 0, 12 and 20 milligrams per liter (mg/L) of NaAsO2. The iAs and
arsenic species (MMA and DMA) were quantiﬁed in placental tissue by
atomic absorption spectroscopy coupled to a hydride generator. Morphologic changes were evaluated in histological sections stained with hematoxylin-eosin and the expression of transporters GLUT 1, GLUT 3 and GLUT
4 was localized by immunohistochemistry and image analysis. Results
showed that fetuses and placentas from females exposed to 20 mg/L had
a signiﬁcant decrease in weight compared with those of non-exposed
group (p<0.01). In placentas from exposed groups, the DMA was the most
abundant arsenical specie found. Moreover, placentas from group exposed
to 20 mg/L showed a signiﬁcant increase (p<0.01) in the frequency of
infarctions, as well as in vascular congestion. Regarding to GLUT transporter expression, exposure to 12 mg/L did not modify the expression of
the transporter GLUT 1, whereas GLUT 3 transporter expression increased
in placentas of the exposed group. By the contrary, GLUT 4 expression was
signiﬁcantly lower (p<0.05) in placentas exposed to 12 mg/L, and although
GLUT 4 expression in 20 mg/dL was lower than observed in non-exposed
group, difference was not signiﬁcant. These results suggest that prenatal
exposure to NaAsO2 induces morphological changes and modiﬁes the
expression of GLUT transporters, which could condition the adequate
nutrition of fetus and alter their development.
Keywords: Arsenic, glucose transporters, inﬂammation, growth restriction

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.68

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.24]
EXPRESSION AND ACTIVITY OF MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASES IN
HUMAN SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST CELLS EXPOSED TO LEAD IN VITRO
G. Sosa-Robledo1, M. Levario-Carrillo2, M.C. González-Horta1, C. Pustovrh3,
F. Larrea4, B. Sánchez-Ramírez*1 et al, 1Facultad de Ciencias Químicas,
Universidad Autónoma de Chihuahua. Chihuahua, Chih., México., Mexico,
2
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Chihuahua. Chihuahua,
Chih., México., Mexico, 3IFIBYNE – Instituto De Fisiología, Biología
Molecular Y Neurociencias, CONICET. Buenos Aires, Argentina., Argentina,
4
Departamento de Biología de la Reproducción. Instituto Nacional de la
Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, México, D.F. CP 14000, México, Mexico
Several studies have shown that placenta does not represent an effective
barrier to lead transport, which can reach the fetus and promote damage.
Prenatal exposure to lead causes placental morphological changes which
could involve the activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), enzymes
responsible for extracellular matrix remodeling. The aim of this study was
to analyze the expression and activity of MMP-2, -3 and -9 in cultures of
human syncytiotrophoblast cells exposed to lead acetate and its relationship with the production of IL-1b and IL-10. Primary cultures of human
syncytiotrophoblasts isolated from placentas obtained through cesarean
procedure performed in women with a healthy pregnancy, were isolated
using the methodology described by Kliman et al. Syncytiotrophoblasts of
48 h of culture were exposed to concentrations of 5, 10, 15, and 20 mM of
lead acetate during 24 h. The expression of mRNA of MMP-2, -3, and -9 was
analyzed by qRT-PCR, the MMPs collagenase activity was quantiﬁed by
zymography, and the production of IL-1b and IL-10 in culture supernatants
was done by immunoassay. The results showed that exposure to lead
signiﬁcantly decreased the expression of MMP-2 (at 15 mM), and in MMP-9
(at 15 and 20 mM), without modifying the expression of MMP-3. The
decrease in the expression of MMP-9 was associated with a decrease in
cytosolic gelatinolytic activity at concentrations of 10 and 20 mM and for
secreted protease by 5mM of lead. No signiﬁcant changes were observed in
the production of IL-1b and IL-10 at any of the concentrations of Pb applied
to the cultures. Notwithstanding, the trend of IL-10 suggests an inverse
relationship with MMP-9 actitity. These results suggest that, in our model,
lead exposure may suppress the expression and activity of MMP-9, effect
that could be regulated by the presence of IL-10.
Keywords: lead, syncytiotrophoblast, metalloproteinases, cytokines

[P2.25]
EXPRESSION OF ACETYLCHOLINE MUSCARINIC RECEPTORS M1 TO M5
IN PLACENTA FROM WOMEN EXPOSED ENVIRONMENTALLY TO
ORGANOPHOSPHATE PESTICIDES
L.C. Colmenero Salas1, M. Levario-Carrillo2, A. B. Torres-Reyes1, B.E. RiveraChavira1, M.C. González-Horta1, B. Sánchez-Ramírez*1, 1Faculty of Chemical
Sciences. Autonomous University of Chihuahua, Chihuahua, Chih., Mexico,
2
Faculty of Medicine. Autonomous University of Chihuahua, Chihuahua,
Chih., Mexico
Studies in experimental rodents have demonstrated that exposure to
organophosphate pesticides (OP) downregulates the expression of M1 and
M2 acetylcholine muscarinic receptors (mAChR). The aim of this study was
to demonstrate the expression of mRNA mAChR M1 to M5 in human term
placenta, analyze its expression and immunelocalization, and the relationship with environmental exposure to OP.
Placenta samples from women without history of metabolic and gestational disease were obtained at delivery (n ¼ 60). Samples were classiﬁed
according to risk of exposure in high (n ¼ 27; women living in agricultural
areas) or low (n ¼ 31; women residing in urban areas). The mRNA
expression of M1 to M5 mAChR subtypes was demonstrated in placental
tissue by RT-PCR using primers previously reported. Immunelocalization
of mAChR subtypes was carried out using speciﬁc antibodies; protein
expression was quantiﬁed using the Image Pro-Plus software. Results
demonstrated that the human term placenta expresses the mAChR
subtypes M1 to M5, proteins expression were localized in syncytiotrophoblast layer of tertiary villous, and the order of magnitude mAChR
protein expression was M2> M1> M3> M4> M5 subtypes. The analysis of
mAChR expression according to risk of OP exposure revealed that
although, in group of high risk of exposure, the ﬁve subtypes of mAChR
showed lower levels of expression, only mAChR M1 had a signiﬁcant
decrease, which modiﬁed the M3 and M4 position in order of magnitude in
high risk population. In analyzing the history of pesticide exposure found
that the decrease was associated with women living with family members
who work in the OP preparation. In conclusion, exposure to OP can
condition a decrease in placental mAChR M1, although the physiological
relevance of M1 receptor in the placenta has not been fully studied, the
decrease may produce alterations in amino acids transport and on fetal
growth.
Keywords: Acetylcholine, organophosphate, pesticides, muscarinic
receptors

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.26]
IN VIVO AND IN VITRO BLASTOCYST DEVELOPMENT AFTER PERIGESTATIONAL ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION IN MOUSE
L.G. Pérez Tito1,2, E. Bevilacqua1, E. Cebral*2, 1Laboratorio de Citoﬁsiología
del Trofoblasto. Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Departamento de Biología Celular y del Desarrollo, Universidad de San Pablo, Brazil, 2Laboratorio
de Reproducción y Fisiopatología Materno-Embrionaria, Depto. de Biodiversidad y Biología Experimental-Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y
Naturales-Universidad de Buenos Aires, IFIBYNE-CONICET, Argentina
Hypothesis: Periconceptional alcohol consumption alters preimplantational mouse embryo differentiation, probably inducing trophoblast
dysfunction.
Objective: to study the effects of periconceptional alcohol ingestion by CD1 mice on in-vivo (day 5 of gestation) and in-vitro blastocyst development
(outgrowth, migration and differentiation). Adult females were exposed to
10% ethanol in drinking water for 15 days previous to and up to 5 days of
gestation (TF) (Control group [CF] - received only water). Recovered
hatched blastocysts were cultured and at 0-24-48 and 72h to analyze the
developmental dynamics (number [Nr] of cells/embryo), morphogenesis
and, trophoblast growth (proliferative rate), differentiation (% diploid [CT]
and giant trophoblast cells [GTC]) and migration (trophoblast expansion
area ([TE]). Embryos were classiﬁed as small, medium and big according to
TE area intervals.
Results: TF presented diminished Nr blastocyts/female (p<0.05) and
elevated percentage of abnormal embryos (p<0.05) vs CF. The percentage
of small, medium and big embryos was invariable in CF through 48hculture; at 48h, TF-bigger embryos % increased (p<0.05 vs 48h-CF) and
small embryos showed an inverted pattern. Trophoblast nuclei Nr
decreased in TF (p<0.05 vs CF, 72h-culture). TE of TF-small and medium
embryos increased at 48 h-culture (p<0.05 vs CF). At 0-24h interval, both
TE of TF-medium and big embryos decreased 14 and 28% vs controls,
respectively. At 24-48 h interval, the same embryos increased 185% and
450% vs controls. TE of TF-small embryo increased in 6.4% and 11% at two
intervals. The % of TGC and the mean TGC and CT area in TF group did not
change.
Conclusions: maternal alcohol ingestion in mouse lead to implanting
embryo losses, morphological anomalies, growth alterations and deregulation of embryo and trophoblastic expansion/migration, suggesting
trophoblast damage during implantation.
Keywords: Blastocyst, Trophoblast, Migration, Differentiation, Implantation, Alcohol.

A.69

[P2.27]
PRETERM FETAL MALFORMATIONS AND PLACENTAL ABNORMALITIES
INDUCED BY PERICONCEPTIONAL ALCOHOL INGESTION DURING THE
FIRST HALF OF PREGNANCY IN CD-1 MOUSE
L.G. Pérez Tito1,2, C.F. Mendes1, S. Moraes3, E. Cebral*2, E. Bevilacqua1,
Laboratorio de Citoﬁsiología del Trofoblasto, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Departamento de Biología Celular y del Desarrollo, Universidad
de San Pablo, Brazil, 2Laboratorio de Reproducción y Fisiopatología
Materno-Embrionaria, IFIBYNE-CONICET, Departamento de Biodiversidad
y Biología Experimental, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Bueno, Argentina, 3Departamento de Anatomía y Patología,
Facultad de Ciencias Médicas y de la Salud, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica
de San Pablo, Brazil
1

Gestational ethanol consumption disrupts fetal development increasing
the teratogenic outcomes and postnatal growth retardation. The objective
was to study the effects of perigestational alcohol ingestion up to ﬁrst half
of pregnancy on preterm fetal and placental growth and external fetal
malformations.
Methods: adult CD-1 females were exposed to 10% ethanol for 15 days
previous and up to 4 (TF-D4), 8 (TF-D8) or 10 (TF-D10) days of gestation,
following replacement ethanol by water up to day 18 of pregnancy. Control
groups (CF) were performed with water. Fetus and placentae were
weighted, measured and ﬁxed for external malformations and skeletal
alizarin red and histology (H-E).
Results: the number of implantation (no.) site (IS) of TF-D8 and TF-D10
was increased vs IS-CF (p<0.01), the total and early resorptions were
elevated and the birth index (alive fetus Nr/IS Nr) was reduced in all
treated groups vs CF (p<0.05). Mean placental weight was diminished in
TF-D4 and TF-D10 vs CF (p<0.05) and histological alterations were found.
The mean fetal weight decreased in TF-D10 vs CF (p<0.05) without
changes in the mean fetal sizes. The % of total malformed fetus was
increased in all treated groups (p<0,001), whereas the malformations
found were: TF-D4: facial (ear implantation defect); TF-D8: facial and
members, TF-D10: craniofacial, members and lower abdominal wall, CF:
facial anomalies. Cranial skeletal (exencephaly) and member defects were
conﬁrmed by Alizarin analysis.
Conclusion: perigestational ingestion of moderate ethanol up to 4, 8 or 10
day of pregnancy induces at term, increased risk of early miscarriages and
fetal growth restriction and external craniofacial malformations. Although
the period of alcohol exposure more susceptible for fetal growth retardation and dysmorphology was the organogenesis, alcohol ingestion up to
preimplantation was able to induce facial defects and suggesting that this
early gestational phase in CD-1 mouse is alcohol-susceptible.
Keywords: Fetus, Malformations, Gestational Alcohol, CD-1 Mouse

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.70

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.28]
PERICONCEPTIONAL ETHANOL CONSUMPTION ALTERS COLLAGENS
AND METALLOPROTEINASE-9 EXPRESSION IN CF-1 MURINE IMPLANTATION SITES AT MIDGESTATION

[P2.29]
ETHYL GLUCURONIDE AND ETHYL SULFATE IN HUMAN PLACENTA AND
FETAL TISSUES; POTENTIAL BIOMARKERS OF MATERNAL ALCOHOL
INTAKE DURING PREGNANCY

T.A. Coll1,3, V. Fontana2, R.R. Favaro3, A.A. Iglesias1, L.G. Pérez Tito1, J.C.
Calvo2, T.M. Zom3, E. Cebral*1 et al, 1Laboratorio de Reproducción y
Fisiopatología Materno-Embrionaria (LARFIMAE),DBBE-UBA, IFIByNECONICET, Argentina, 2Laboratorio de Química de Proteoglicanos y Matriz
Extracelular, QB-UBA, Argentina, 3Laboratorio de Biología da Reprodução e
Matriz Extracelular (LBR-MEC), Dpto.de Biologia Celular e do Desenvolvimento, ICB-USP, Brazil

L Morini1, M Falcon*2, S Pichini3, O Garcia-Algar4, O Vall4, P Danesino1 et al,
University of Pavia, Italy, 2University of Murcia, Spain, 3Istituto Superiore
di Sanità, Italy, 4Institut Municipal d'Investigació Mèdica-Hospital del Mar,
Spain

Periconceptional alcohol ingestion causes organogenic embryo anomalies,
growth restriction and increased early miscarriages. The matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) cleaves type IV and V collagens, playing a role in
decidualization, angiogenesis, trophoblastic migration and its invasion
into the decidua.
Objective: To evaluate if periconceptional ethanol ingestion alters the
distribution and deposition of collagen types I, III, IV and V, and MMP-9
expression and activity in vascular mesometrial decidua (VMD) and
trophoblastic (T) tissues when organogenesis is occuring.
Methods: Adult CF-1 female mice were treated (TG) with 10% ethanol in
drinking water for 17 days previously and up to day 10 of gestation, and
they were compared to control group (CG). Implantation sites were processed for picrosirius staining for ﬁbrillar collagens, and immunohistochemistry for I, III, IV, V collagens and MMP-9. Decidual tissues (D) were
dissected to perform western blotting for MMP-9 and conditioned media
from D 24 h-culture was used to zymograms.
Results: In VMD-CG picrosirius staining was observed as a deﬁned and
continuous line underlying the region of basal membrane of the endothelium of blood vessel, whereas in the VMD-TG it was discontinuous and
faintly stained. Collagens I and III had similar immunostaining in the VMDCG and VMD-TG, whereas the immunoreaction for type IV and V collagens
was increased in VMD-TG. A slight immunoreaction for MMP-9 was
detected in both VMD-CG and T-CG. However, the immunoreactivity was
signiﬁcantly reduced in VMD-TG and T-TG. In D-TG, the MMP-9 expression
(immunoblotting) and zymographic analysis for the active form in
conditioned medium was signiﬁcantly decreased vs D-CG.
Discussion: Periconceptional alcohol ingestion, alters collagens deposition
and collagen ﬁbrils arrangement in the mouse pregnant endometrium,
which was correlated with reduced MMP-9 expression and activity. These
effects may be related to early anomalies in decidual-placental development and increased miscarriage due to maternal alcohol consumption.
Keywords: Metalloproteinase-9, Collagens, Placentation, Alcohol.

1

Introduction: Toxicity of ethanol during ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy in
humans is well known, but toxic mechanisms and ethanol effects on the
placenta and the fetus development are not yet fully clariﬁed. Toxicokinetics of ethanol and materno-placental and fetal metabolism during
early pregnancy could be useful for a deeper understanding of Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder.
The aim of this study was to develop a method for the direct determination
of ethyl glucuronide (EtG) and ethyl sulfate (EtS), in placental and fetal
human tissues, as potential biomarkers of ethanol exposure during the
ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy.
Methods: Placental and fetal tissues samples were obtained from women
undergoing voluntary termination of pregnancy at 12th week of gestation.
After addition of D5-EtG and D5-EtS as internal standards, samples were
deproteinized with acetonitrile, centrifuged and diluted 1:10 in bidistilled
water. Then an aliquot was directly injected in a LC-MS/MS system, operating in negative polarity and in MRM mode, by monitoring two reactions
for each analyte. A LOD of 3 and a LLOQ of 5 pg/mg were reached for both
metabolites and a six-point calibration curve ranging from 5-1000 pg/mg
was used for quantiﬁcation purposes.
Results: The method was fully validated and applied to 24 placenta-fetal
tissue samples. Two out of 24 cases tested positive for EtG and EtS for both
placenta and fetal tissues (Table).
Case 1

EtG pg/mg
EtS pg/mg

Case 2

Placental tissue

Fetal tissue

Placental tissue

Fetal tissue

122.2

33.2
50.7

1305.8

391.0
under the
LLOQ

Conclusion: For the ﬁrst time an analytical method was set up and validated for the determination of EtG and EtS in placental and fetal tissues.
Preliminary results suggest that these metabolites are present in both
tissues of pregnant women and can be further evaluated as speciﬁc
markers in the diagnosis of alcohol intake during pregnancy.
Keywords: ethyl glucuronide, ethyl sulfate, pregnancy, FASD

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.30]
FAT OVERLOAD IN MATERNAL DIET INDUCES PLACENTOMEGALY AND
FETAL MACROSOMIA IN PREGNANT RATS: ROLE OF LEPTIN
V White*, N Martínez, E Capobianco, A Jawerbaum, Laboratory of Reproduction and Metabolism. CEFYBO-CONICET. School of Medicine. University
of Buenos Aires, Argentina
Introduction: Fat overload in maternal diet can increase lipid transfer
across the placenta to the developing fetus. This may cause fetal metabolic
alterations and macrosomia. Placental endothelial (EL) and lipoprotein
(LPL) lipases are key regulators of maternal-to-fetal lipid transport. The
aims of this study were to evaluate the effects of fat overload in the diet of
pregnant rats on maternal, fetal and placental weight, as well as leptin,
insulin and lipid proﬁle in maternal and fetal plasma, and to analyze
placental expression of lipases, evaluating the role of leptin in the
expression of EL and LPL.
Methods: Rats were subjected to a standard diet (control) with 5% fat or
a fatty diet (FD) enriched with 25% saturated fat. Also, fetuses from control
rats were injected with leptin (200 ng) or vehicle through the uterine wall
on days 19, 20 and 21 of gestation. Maternal plasma, placentas, fetuses and
fetal plasma were obtained on day 21 of gestation. Plasma insulin and
leptin levels were evaluated by EIA, lipid levels by colorimetric assays, and
placental expression of EL and LPL by PCR.
Results: Maternal weight gain, and fetal and placental weight were greater
in FD group (p<0.05) compared to controls. The FD group showed higher
triglycerides (p<0.01), insulin (p<0.05) and leptin (p<0.01) levels in
maternal and fetal plasma. Also, FD fetuses had increased cholesterol
plasma levels (p<0.01). Placentas from the FD group and from leptininjected fetuses showed no changes in EL expression, but, interestingly, the
same increase in LPL expression (p<0.05), when compared to controls.
Conclusions: Fat overload in maternal diet causes an increase in fetal lipid
and leptin levels, which promotes lipid transfer to the fetus by inducing
placental LPL expression. Fetal and placental overgrowth can be caused by
the increased bioavailability of insulin, leptin and lipids in the developing
fetus.
Keywords: placenta, fetus, leptin, lipid

A.71

[P2.31]
MATERNAL CIRCULATING LEVELS OF OMEGA (N)3 LONG CHAIN
POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS, EICOSAPENTAENOIC ACID (EPA),
DOCOSAPENTAENOIC ACID (DPA) AND DOCOSAHEXAENOIC ACID
(DHA) DURING EARLY PREGNANCY ARE ASSOCIATED WITH FETAL
GROWTH MEASURES IN LATER PREGNANCY
PC McLernon1, LG Wood2, VE Murphy2, GA Dekker1, VL Clifton*1, 11The
Robinson Institute, Research Centre for Early Origins of Health and Disease,
Lyell McEwin Hospital & The University of Adelaide, Australia, 2Hunter
Medical Research Institute & The University of Newcastle, Australia
Introduction: Although pregnancies complicated by asthma have been
associated with reduced fetal growth, certain dietary nutrients such as
omega (n) 3 fatty acids are thought to confer a protective effect against the
inﬂammation that occurs in asthma. We therefore examined the relationship between circulating levels and dietary intake of n3s in pregnancies complicated by asthma and related these to fetal growth.
Methods: Peripheral blood was collected from, and a 24 hour food recall
questionnaire was completed by asthmatic (n¼15) and non-asthmatic
(n¼21) pregnant women at gestational weeks (G) 18, 30 and 36. Circulating levels of n3s were analysed using gas chromatography and dietary
analysis was conducted using Foodworks software. Fetal growth parameters were analysed by ultrasound at each gestational visit.
Results: Circulating EPA and DPA (but not DHA) were signiﬁcantly lower in
the low (BWC) group than the high BWC group (ANOVA; p<.05) at G18.
There was no consistent pattern of circulating EPA over pregnancy in the
low BWC group in either the asthmatic or control groups. Circulating EPA
was systematically reduced over pregnancy in the high BWC group in both
the asthmatic and control groups. There were no signiﬁcant differences
between maternal dietary intake of EPA, DPA or DHA, nor of maternal
energy intake.
In the asthmatics, maternal circulating levels of DHA (the most abundant
n3 in neural phospholipids) at G18, 30 and 36 in the low BWC group were
negatively correlated with head circumference (HC) and biparietal diameter (BPD) at G36 (p<.05). Irrespective of BWC category, in the asthmatic
group, maternal circulating levels of DHA at G18, 30 and 36, as well as EPA
and DPA at G36 were all negatively correlated with head circumference
(HC) at G36 (p<.05). Interestingly, this pattern of results was not found in
the control group.
Discussion: Under normal developmental conditions, it seems that the
fetus is able to utilise the n3 fatty acids available over the course of
pregnancy. It appears that placental uptake and preferential transfer of
these n3fatty acids is impaired in fetuses on a low BWC developmental
trajectory. Further, these data suggest that if fetal ontogeny develops under
asthmatic conditions, it may be either asthma or its treatment which
hinders the capacity of the fetoplacental unit to utilise n3s in order to
enhance fetal growth. Under such conditions, maternal supplementation
with DHA may not improve fetal growth.
Keywords: omega 3 fatty acids, fetal growth, asthma, diet

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.72

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.32]
PLASMA AND PLACENTAL IL-10 IN HYPERGLYCEMIC PREGNANT
WOMEN- CORRELATION WITH PLACENTAL AND FETAL MORPHOMETRY

[P2.33]
CHRONIC INCUBATION WITH HIGH EXTRACELLULAR D-GLUCOSE
INCREASES THE CONTRACTILITY OF HUMAN UMBILICAL VEIN RINGS

JB Moreli*1, RL Amorin2, AMC Ruocco1, YK Sinzato1, DC Damasceno1, IMP
Calderon1, 1Sao Paulo State University, Botucatu Medical School, Post
graduate program in Gynecology, Obstetrics and Mastology, Brazil, 2Paulo
State University, School of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Brazil

P Ávila*1, S Rojas1, V Gallardo1, L Sobrevia2, M González1,2, 1Universidad de
Concepción, Chile, 2Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile

Introduction: IL-10 is fundamental for integrated mother-fetus-placental
development1. The purpose of this study was to compare placental IL-10
by immnunohistochemistry (using polymer system linked to phosphatase)
with maternal plasma concentrations and correlate them with fetal and
placental development markers in hyperglycemic pregnant women.
Methods: This cross-sectional study included pregnant women and their
newborns (NB) and placentas. Based on 100g-GTT and glucose proﬁle
analysis (GP) performed at 24-28 weeks of gestation, subjects were
allocated into three groups: Nondiabetic (ND; n¼5)- normal 100g-GTT
+normal GP, Mild hyperglycemic (MH; n¼6) – normal 100g-GTT+abnormal
GP, and Diabetic (DM; n¼15) – abnormal 100g-GTT (nongestational and
gestational)+abnormal GP2,3. Variables assessed: maternal  glycemic
mean (GM / glucose-oxydase), glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c / chromatography) and IL-10 plasma levels (ELISA) at the 3rd trimester; placental  IL-10
immunolabeling (stain score: 0- unstained, 1- weak, 2- medium, 3- strong),
weight, placental index (placental weight/NB weight), and villous area; NB
 weight and ponderal índex (weight / lenght3). Statistical analyses were
performed using ANOVA (test F and Tukey test), LSMeans test (gamma
error) and Spearman correlation test (p<0.05).
Results: GM (mg/dL) and HbA1c (%) values were: 78.5911.54 / 4.860.59
(ND), < 100.305.80 / 5.560.55 (MH), < 114.9720.72 / 6.901.09 (DM)
(p<0.05). In MH, plasma IL-10 values were higher, villosity score was 2
(p¼0.019), fetal and placental weight were higher, and placental index was
lower. DM showed the lowest plasma IL-10 values and highest percentage
of unstained villosities. Correlations of placental IL-10 with placental
weight (r¼0.2908; p<0.0001) and fetal weight (r¼0.1645; p<0.0001) as
well as between plasma IL-10 and placental IL-10(r¼0.8898, p<0.001)
were observed.
Discussion: GM control promoted both maternal and placental IL-10
production, favoring fetal and placental development in MH 1,4 but not in
DM. These ﬁndings show that keeping maternal MG100.00mg/dL is
necessary.
References
1. Thaxton JE, Sharma S.Inteleukin-10: A Mult-faceted Agent of Pregnancy.
Am J Reprod Immunol. 2010.
2. Rudge MV, Peraçoli JC, Berezowski AT, Calderon IM, Brazil MA. Braz J
Med Biol Res.1990.23(11):1079-89
3. American Diabetes Association (ADA). Diagnosis and classiﬁcation of
diabete mellitus.Diabetes Care 2009 32 (Suppl 1): S62-S67. Avaliable in:
http://care.diabetesjournals.org/cgi/reprint/32/Supplement_1/S62 .
 ska-Marczewska M, G1owacka E, Grodzicka A, Sobczak M, Cypryk
4. Pertyn
 ski JR, Wilczyn
 ski J. Proﬁle of peripheral blood neutrophil
K, Wilczyn
cytokines in diabetes type 1 pregnant women and its correlation with
selected parameters in the newborns. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2010. 63
(2):150-60.
Keywords: IL-10, placenta, diabetes mellitus, pregnancy

Chronic incubation with high extracellular concentration of D-glucose
induces changes in signaling pathways related with nitric oxide bioavailability in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). However, it
has not been determined whether the chronic exposure to high D-glucose
induces changes in vascular reactivity of human umbilical veins. We
studied whether high concentration of D-glucose increases the response to
a vasoconstrictor in human umbilical veins.
Methods: Umbilical vein rings were obtained from normal pregnancies
(Ethics Committee approval and informed patient consent were obtained).
Rings (we5 mm) were mounted on isometric force transducer and registered highest contractile response to 62.5 mM KCl. The rings were incubated (2-24 hours) with 5 mM D-glucose (control) or 25 mM D-glucose.
After incubation, vessels were exposed to U46619 (10-9-10-5 M)
(thromboxane A2 analogue).
Results: 25 mM D-glucose induces an increase (w0.25-fold) in the
maximal relative response to U46619, without changes in the EC50 (23  0.
5 versus 12  0.7 nM for 5 versus 25 mM D-glucose; P>0.05, two way
ANOVA test). After a period of 4 hours there was no difference in the
U46619-dose response curves. However, vessels incubated for 24 hours
with 25 mM D-glucose show an increase (w2.6-fold) in the maximal
contraction in response to this vasocosntrictor, without changing the
EC50 values (23  0.5 versus 12  0.7 nM for 5 versus 25 mM Dglucose; P>0.05, two way ANOVA test)., compared with vessels exposed
to 5 mM D-glucose.
Conclusions: chronic incubation with a high concentration of D-glucose
induces an increase in the vasoconstrictory response of human umbilical
veins. These ﬁndings could be determinant in diseases where a pathological plasma D-glucose is chronically exposed to human fetal endothelium,
such as in gestational diabetes.
Supported by DIUC 210.033.103-1.0 Universidad de Concepción,
FONDECYT 1070865 & 1080534, and CONICYT ACT-73 (PIA), Chile.
Keywords: D-Glucose, Vascular reactivity, Umbilical vein

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.34]
PEROXYNITRITES AND MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASES IN THE TERM
PLACENTA FROM TYPE 2 DIABETIC PATIENTS
E Capobianco*1, M Sosa1, N Basualdo2, I Di Marco2, C Faingold3, A Jawerbaum1,
1
Laboratory of Reproduction and Metabolism-CEFYBO-CONICET-UBA,
Argentina, 2Obstetric Unit 2-Hospital Materno-Infantil Ramón Sardá,
Argentina, 3Endocrinology Department-Unidad Asistencial Por más salud
Dr César Milstein, Argentina
Introduction: Type 1 pregestational diabetes leads to a pro-inﬂammatory
intrauterine environment, characterized by increased reactive oxygen
species (ROS), nitric oxide (NO) overproduction and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) overactivity. The objective of this work was to
address evidence of oxidative and nitrative stress in term placentas from
Type 2 pregestational diabetes, and to analyze whether peroxynitrites
regulate the activity of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the placenta.
Methods: Term placental villous tissues from healthy and pregestational
Type 2 diabetic patients, were isolated and frozen (-80 C) for further
determination of TBARS (an index of lipid peroxidation), nitrates/nitrites
(an index of NO production), concentrations of nitrated proteins (enzyme
immunoanalysis and Western Blot). Placental explants were incubated a)
in the presence or absence of FeTPPs (a peroxynitrite catalyst) for further
determination of nitrates/nitrites and TBARS, and b) in the presence or
absence of peroxynitrites (10-100mM) for further determination of MMPs
activity by zymography.
Results: The placenta from Type 2 diabetic patients showed increased
concentrations of nitrates/nitrites (p<0.01), TBARS (p<0.01) and nitrated
proteins (p<0.001) when compared to controls. The addition of a peroxynitrite catalyst reduced nitrates/nitrites (p<0.05) and TBARS (p<0.05)
concentrations in the diabetic placenta, while no changes were observed
in the control tissues. The addition of peroxynitrites increased the activation of both MMP-2 and MMP-9 proenzymes in the control placenta
(p<0.05), while no changes were observed in the diabetic tissues.
Conclusions: In the human placenta, peroxynitrites can exert damage, in
part due to its capacity to induce lipid peroxidation and MMPs overactivity.
Markers of both oxidative and nitrative stress are found in term placentas
from Type 2 diabetic patients and can be related to MMPs overactivity.
Keywords: Placenta, Peroxynitrites, Matrix Metalloproteinases, Lipid
peroxidation

A.73

[P2.35]
EFFECTS OF LONG-TERM TYPE 1 DIABETES ON THE MOUSE PLACENTA
J.C.T. Sanches*, R.R. Favaro, R.M. Salgado, M.A. Uchiyama, E. Bevilacqua,
T.M. Zom, University of São Paulo, Brazil
Diabetic pregnancies are associated with a higher incidence of pregnancy
loss, malformations and intrauterine growth restriction1. It is known that
the development of complications in pregnancy is directly related to the
severity and the duration of diabetes2. Our group has developed a model of
pregnancy complicated by long-term type 1 diabetes in mice, whose
characteristics are comparable to those in women with poorly controlled
type 1 diabetes of long duration, with the presence of vasculopathy3. In
this study we investigated the effects of long-term diabetes on the structure of the placenta and the deposition of ﬁbrillar collagens. Diabetes was
induced by a single injection of alloxan. Diabetic females, with blood
glucose levels 400mg/dL, were mated with normal males between
80-110 days after diabetes induction. Placentas and fetuses were collected
at 18 days of pregnancy, weighed, ﬁxed in Methacarn and processed for
parafﬁn embedding. Placental samples were stained with hematoxylineosin and picrosirius. Diabetic female mice exhibited the pathophysiological features of human type 1 diabetes, characterized by hyperglycemia,
hipoinsulinemia, polyuria, glycosuria, polyphagy, polidipsia and decreased
body weight. Moreover, the number and weight of the fetuses were
signiﬁcantly lower, whereas the placental weight was signiﬁcantly higher,
when compared to the control group. Placentas from diabetic mice showed
morphological changes, characterized by an increase and disorganization
of the spongiotrophoblast, diminution of the labyrinth, dilatation of their
blood vessels and increased collagen deposition. As far as we are concerned, this is the animal model of pregnancy complicated by type 1
diabetes with the longest duration reported in the literature. Our results
indicate that poor fetal development is correlated to placental alterations.
Moreover, structural alterations and increased collagen deposition in the
labyrinth, ﬁrst described herein, may contribute to alter maternal and fetal
exchanges and consequently impair fetal development.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.74

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.36]
GENDER-DEPENDENT REGULATION OF LIPID METABOLIZING ENZYMES
IN THE FETAL HEART FROM CONTROL AND DIABETIC RATS
M Kurtz*, V White, R Higa, N Martínez, A Jawerbaum, Laboratory of
Reproduction and Metabolism, CEFYBO-CONICET, School of Medicine,
University of Buenos Aires, Argentina
Introduction: In maternal diabetes, the fetal heart is exposed to the
increased lipid transfer through the placenta. PPARa regulates the
expression of several enzymes of lipid metabolism such as acylCoA oxidase
(ACO) and carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 (CPT-1), respective rate
limiting enzymes in peroxisomal and mitochondrial fatty acid b-oxidation.
Objective: To evaluate lipid concentrations and PPARa, ACO and CPT-1
expression in the fetal heart from control and diabetic rats, and to analyze
whether PPARa activation regulates PPARa, ACO and CPT-1 expression in
hearts from female and male fetuses from control and diabetic rats.
Methods: Diabetes was induced in rat neonates by streptozotocin
administration. On day 21 of gestation, fetal hearts were explanted and
lipid concentrations (TLC and densitometry) and PPARa, ACO and CPT-1
expression (RT-PCR) were analyzed. Also, fetuses from control and diabetic
rats were injected through the uterine wall with the PPARa agonist
leukotriene B4 (LTB4, 0.1mM) on days 19, 20, and 21 of gestation. On day 21
of gestation, fetal heart expression of PPARa, ACO and CPT-1 were
evaluated.
Results: Male and female fetal hearts from diabetic rats showed increased
concentrations of triglycerides (p<0.001), cholesterol (p<0.05) and
phospholipids (p<0.05) and no changes in cholesteryl ester concentrations. PPARa (p<0.01), ACO (p<0.05) and CPT-1 expression (p<0.001) were
reduced in male fetal hearts, while only CPT-1 (p<0.05) was reduced in
female fetal hearts.
In diabetic animals, fetal treatment with LTB4 increased PPARa in male and
female fetal hearts (p<0.05), increased ACO in male and female fetal hearts
(p<0.01) and increased CPT-1 only in male fetal hearts (p<0.01).
Conclusions: Overaccumulation of lipids in the fetal heart is probably
related to reductions in the expression of the transcription factor and
enzymes studied that regulate lipid oxidation. This expression can be
positively regulated by fetal administration of a natural PPARa agonist in
a gender-dependent manner.
Keywords: Diabetes, Fetus, Lipids, Heart

[P2.37]
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN MATERNAL
SERUM ADIPONECTIN,
PLACENTAL ADIPONECTIN MRNA AND UMBILICAL CORD SERUM ADIPONECTIN CONCENTRATION IN UNCOMPLICATED PREGNANCY
K Dawczynski1, H de Vries1, J Beck1, A Hübler1, E Schleussner*2, 1Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Jena, Friedrich Schiller University
Jena, Germany, 2Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena,
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
Aims: Adiponectin (APN) may play a role in adapting energy metabolism at
the materno-fetal indifference. The potential effects on the placental APN
expression of the APN serum concentration in umbilical cord blood and
maternal blood have not been assessed so far. The aim of the study was to
investigate the relationship between placental APN mRNA expression,
maternal serum APN concentration and umbilical cord serum APN
concentration in full-term healthy newborns.
Methods: We analyzed the mRNA expression proﬁle of APN in 22
placentas and the APN serum concentration in 23 cord blood samples from
healthy newborns (gestational age 37.0 to 41.5 weeks, birth weight 2800 to
4120 g, birth length 46 to 54 cm) and 23 maternal blood samples. The
mRNA transcript levels of APN were quantiﬁed by RT-RCR. The APN
concentration was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Results: The highest levels of APN serum concentration were fund in
umbilical cord blood. Mean concentration  SD of APN was 34.88 mg/ml 
12.8 (umbilical cord) vs. 6.62.3 (maternal circulation, P< 0.001). There is
no signiﬁcant correlation between maternal APN and cord APN concentration. Otherwise, cord APN concentration was positively associated with
birth weight (r¼0.55; p¼0.01). APN gene expression was found in 8 out of
22 placentas in a very low concentration. There is no correlation between
placental APN mRNA and umbilical cord serum APN or maternal serum
APN concentration.
Conclutions: This study suggests that high serum APN concentration in
umbilical cord blood and maternal blood are not regulated by placental
APN mRNA gene expression. In contrast to the ﬁndings in adults, these
results implicate that the cord APN concentration increases with the fetal
fat.
Keywords: adiponectin, placental mRNA expression, cord blood, maternal
serum

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.38]
PLACENTAL SECRETION OF THE GROWTH HORMONES ADIPONECTIN,
GHRELIN, INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTOR 1 AND 2 AND THEIR BINDING
PROTEINS IN THE DUALLY PERFUSED HUMAN TERM PLACENTA
E Schleussner*1, L Seyfarth1, U Enke1, K Dawczynski2, A Huebler2,
1
Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Friedrich Schiller
University, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Jena,
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
Objectivs: Adiponectin, an adipocytokine, and ghrelin, an orexigenic
acylated peptide, as well as insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) and their
binding proteins (IGFBPs) are likely involved in the fetal growth. The
placental share of the fetal production has not been proven yet. The aim of
our study was to determine the placental release of adiponectin, leptin,
IGFs and IGFBPs into the maternal and fetal circulation.
Methods: We performed dually recirculated perfusions of isolated cotyledons from 9 term human placentae as previously described (Schneider
and Huch, Contr. Gyn. Obstet. 13:40-47, 1985). The concentrations of adiponectin, ghrelin, IGF-1 and -2, IGFBP-1,-2 and -3 were measured in fetal
and maternal compartment by immunoassay.
Results: Adiponectin, IGF-1, IGFBP-1 and IGFBP-2 were measured both on
the fetal and maternal side of the dual in vitro perfused placenta. For each
hormone, the maternal release preceeded the release on the fetal side. IGF2, IGFBP-3 and ghrelin were only detectable in the maternal circulation.
There is a closed correlation between IGF-2 und ghrelin and all measured
IGFBP's in the maternal side.
Discussion: Contrary to ghrelin, IGF-2 and the IGFBP-3, placental release of
adiponectin as well as IGF-1 and IGFBP-1 and -2 might directly contribute
to the fetal pool of these hormones.
Keywords: adiponectin, dually placenta perfusion, ghrelin, insulin-like
growth factors

A.75

[P2.40]
SMOKING DURING PREGNANCY REDUCED CORD BLOOD ADIPONECTIN
LEVEL
A Huebler1, D Schlenvoigt1, E Kauf1, J Westphal2, D Schramm1,
E Schleussner*2, 1Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Jena,
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany, 2Department of Obstetrics,
University Hospital Jena, Friedrich Schiller University, Germany
Objectivs: Fetal growth restriction caused by maternal smoking during
pregnancy may related with effects on fetal growth hormone synthesis.
The aim of the study was to compare the cord blood levels of fetal metabolic hormones after uncomplicated pregnancies at term in smoking and
non-smoking women.
Methods: Adiponectin, ghrelin, IGF-1, IGFBP-1, IGFBP-3 and insulin were
measured in the venous cord blood of 77 term newborns of non-diabetic
women (38 girls and 39 boys; median (interquartile range) gestational age
39 (38-40) weeks and birth weight 3310 (3095-3310) g. 16 pregnant
women reported smoking of 5 to 10 cigarettes per day, whereas 55 nonsmokers used as controls (unclear information in 6 cases
Results: Cord blood adiponectin was correlated positively with gestational
age and as IGF-1 and insulin with the birth weight. Insulin level was
correlated with the placental weight too, but negative associated with
umbilical artery pH (Pearson correlation, all p< 0.05). Smoking during
pregnancy reduced signiﬁcantly cord blood adiponection levels as well as
neonatal BMI and head circumference (Mann-Whitney test; all p<0.05).
Conclusion: Smoking during pregnancy may inﬂuence fetal growth
dynamics by affecting fetal endocrine metabolic regulation indicated in
lowering adiponectin secretion.
Keywords: smoking during pregnancy, fetal growth hormones,
adiponectin

[P2.39]
DIETARY FATTY ACID INTAKE IN PREGNANCY AND IMPACT ON FETAL
LEVEL OF ESSENTIAL AND TRANS FATTY ACIDS AND BASAL CYTOKINE
LEVELS
U Enke*1, A Jaudszus2, E Schleußner1, G Jahreis2, L Seyfarth1, 1Placenta
Labor, Germany, 2Dept. of Nutritional Physiology, Germany
Introduction: The intake of dietary fatty acids by the pregnant mother
may have an impact on duration of pregnancy and fetal development.
While it is known that long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFA)
are essential for the fetus and their metabolites may inﬂuence immune
reactions, trans fatty acids (tFA) likely disturb these physiological
processes. In contrast, a special group of tFA occurring in milk fat, conjugated linoleic acids (CLA), are suggested to be preferentially transferred to
the fetus and have some modulatory effects on the immune system.
Methods: To analyse a possible correlation between the long term dietary
intake of fatty acids, especially n-3 and n-6 LC-PUFA, CLA and tFA, and the
level of cytokines in cord blood of term born infants, cord and maternal
blood (n¼110) were collected and prepared for gas chromatographic lipid
analysis in erythrocyte membranes and analysis of spontaneous production of 11 Th1/Th2 cytokines in cord Plasma by cytometric bead array.
Results: While n-3 (e.g. EPA, DHA) and n-6 (e.g. AA) LC-PUFA are transferred preferentially from the maternal circulation to the fetus, CLA, as well
as tFA, are not. We found a positive correlation of tFA and CLA between the
maternal and fetal circulation indicating a passive transfer of those fatty
acids to the unborn. Additionally, there was an inverse correlation between
trans fatty acids and LC-PUFA and an inverse correlation between AA in the
maternal circulation and the n-3 LC-PUFAs in the fetal circulation.
All analysed cytokines can be detected in cord plasma but mostly at a low
level. However, we found some correlations between high levels of cytokines and the level of different fatty acids.
Discussion: Our results give a preliminary evidence for subtle modiﬁcation of neonatal cytokine levels by maternal nutrition even without
supplementation of n-3 LC-PUFA or ﬁsh oil.
Keywords: LC-PUFA, trans fatty acid, cytokine, cord

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.76

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.41]
PLACENTAL IMMUNOSTAININGS OF VEGF, COX-2 AND CASPASE-3 IN
PREGNANCIES COMPLICATED BY DIABETES OR MILD HYPERGLYCEMIA RELATIONSHIP WITH HYPERGLYCEMIA AND UMBILICAL DOPPLER
SAL Carvalho-Silva*1,3, JB Moreli1, RAA Costa1, MVC Rudge1, IMP Calderon1,
1
Sao Paulo State University, Botucatu Medical School, Post Graduate
Program in Gynecology, Obstetrics and Mastology, Brazil, 2Sao Paulo State
University, School Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Brazil,
3
University of Pernambuco, Brazil, 4IMIP, Brazil
Introduction: The results on human placental angiogenesis and hyperglycemia are few and conﬂicting.1,2,3,4 Also, they are rare and controversial,
those who evaluated apoptosis in placentas from pregnancies associated
with diabetes5,6. The aim was to evaluate correlations between average
glucose (AG) and doppler cord (Umbilical PI) with placental immunostainings for VEGF, COX-2 and caspase-3 in pregnancies complicated by
diabetes mellitus (DM), or mild hyperglycemia (HL).
Methods: cross-sectional samples of placentas of 41 pregnant women,
divided into three groupos  DM (N ¼ 20) HL (N ¼ 7) and ND (N ¼ 14). The
samples were processed for immunohistochemistry using polymer system
linked to peroxidase. Slides were randomized to blinded evaluation in
image analysis system. We evaluated AG, PI and umbilical placental
immunostainings for VEGF, caspase-3 and COX-2, in semi and quantitative
analysis. The statistical analysis used were ANOVA (F test, followed by
Tukey test), LSMeans test and Spearman correlation, p  0.05.
Results: The AG differed in the groups ND (79.603.40 mg / dl) and HL
(87.974.64 mg / dl) from DM (113.91 2.81 mg / dl) (p <0.000) but did not
correlate with the placental immunostainings. Umbilical PI was similar in
ND (1.030.20) and DM (1.050.20), lower in the HL group (0.890.11)
(p¼0.003) and not correlated with VEGF. Umbilical PI correlated inversely
with caspase-3 and the same trend in relation to COX-2. At HL group, in the
majority of vessels positive for VEGF were strongly marked, the other two
groups predominantly moderate intensity.
Discussion: The MG, around 110mg/dl, was a limiting factor for the
proposed correlations. The results of umbilical PI were partial and inverse
deﬁned by the conditions of apoptosis and cellular regeneration of the
placentas. These results are not deﬁned, but emphasize the validity of
maternal glycemic control.
References
1- Calderon IMP, Damasceno DC, Amorin RL, Costa RAA, Brasil MAM, Rudge
MVC. Morphometric study of placental villous and vessels in maternal
hyperglycemia, gestational and overt diabetic pregnancies. Diabetes
Research 2007; 78: 65-71
2- Mayhew TM, Charnock-Jones DS, Kaufmann P. Aspects of human fetoplacental vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. III. Changes in complicated
pregnancies. Placenta 2004; 25: 127-139.
3-Desoye G, Mouzon SH. The Human Placenta in Gestational Diabetes
Mellitus  The insulin and cytokine network. Diabetes Care 2007; 30
(Suppl 2): S120-S126
4-Janota J, Pomyje J, Toth D, Sosna O, Zivny J, Kuzel D, Stranak Z, Necas E,
ZivnyJH. Expression of angiopoietic factors in normal and type-I diabetes
human placenta: a pilot study. Eur J Obstet & Gynecol and Reprod Biol
2003; 111: 153-156.
5-Sgarbosa F, Barbisan LF, Brasil MAM, Costa E, Calderon IMP, Gonçalves
CR, Bevilacqua E, Rudge MVC. Changes in apoptosis and Bcl-2 expression in
human hyperglycemia, term placental trophoblast. Diab Res Clin Prac.
2006; 73: 143-149.
6-Cobellis L, De Falco M, Torella M, Trabucco E, Caprio F, Federico E, et al.
Modulation of Bax expression in physiological and pathological human
placentas throughout pregnancy. In Vivo. 2007; 21: 777-83.
Keywords: placenta, VEGF, COX-2, CASPASE-3

[P2.42]
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECT OF INSULIN
PLACENTAL ENDOTHELIAL CELLS

ON

ARTERIAL VS

VENOUS

L Lassance*, U Hiden, M Augsten, M Absänger, H Hackl, G Desoye, 1Medical
University of Graz, Austria, 2Innsbruck Medical University, Austria
Introduction: Maternal diabetes is often associated with fetal hyperinsulinemia activating placental insulin receptors. These are mainly
located on the vasculature at term of gestation but their function is
unknown. Angiogenesis is a candidate process and may depend on oxygen,
extracellular matrix (ECM) and PKB/eNOS activation. We hypothesized
that insulin induces pro-angiogenic signaling which may differ between
arteries vs veins as they vary in ECM and blood oxygenation.
Methods: Microarray analysis of human primary placental arterial (AEC)
and venous (VEC) endothelial cells determined the effect of insulin in 12
and 21% oxygen. Effects of insulin and ECM (collagenI/ﬁbronectin/laminin/
gelatin) on angiogenesis (in vitro network formation) and proliferation
(cell number) were analyzed with or without eNOS inhibitor (L-NAME
200mM) and NO donor (NONOate 200mM). Insulin (10nM) signaling was
determined in AEC in 12 and 21% oxygen by immunoblotting.
Results: Microarray analyses revealed differential expression of angiogenesis and ECM-related genes, and distinct insulin effects in AEC vs VEC.
Proliferation and survival of AEC were independent on the ECM used,
while VEC showed increased proliferation and survival on collagen and
ﬁbronectin. Only AEC, but not VEC, were able to form networks. Insulin and
NO donor increased the total length and branching points in the AEC
network and this was abolished by eNOS inhibitor. No insulin effect was
observed on VEC. Insulin induced phosphorylation of PKB and the downstream GSK3 in 21% oxygen, but not in 12%, and was unable to activate
Erk1/2 and downstream S6-kinase. Insulin also stimulated eNOS phosphorylation in AEC but not in VEC.
Conclusions: Placental AEC and VEC are different in their angiogenic
potential and in their interaction with their environment. In 21% oxygen
insulin is able to activate PKB and eNOS in AEC and, hence, induces
angiogenesis. Therefore, insulin may contribute to the hypervascularisation present in the diabetic placenta.
Keywords: maternal diabetes, angiogenesis, insulin, ECM

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.43]
EFFECT OF ADENOVIRUS-MEDIATED GENE TRANSFER OF INSULIN
GROWTH FACTOR -1(AD-IGF-1) ON NUTRIENT TRANSPORT MECHANISMS IN HUMAN TROPHOBLAST (BEWO CELLS)
HN Jones*, F-Y Lim, SG Keswani, TM Crombleholme, MA Habli, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, United States
We have previously demonstrated in vitro that transfection of trophoblast
cells with Ad-IGF-1 signiﬁcantly increases secreted IGF-1 levels and cell
proliferation and in vivo that site-speciﬁc placental Ad- IGF-1 corrects fetal
weight in mouse, rat and rabbit models of placental insufﬁciency. To
investigate the involvement of altered nutrient transport, we examined
the effects of Ad-IGF-1 on BeWo amino acid and glucose transport
mechanisms.
Methods: Human BeWo choriocarcinoma cells (CCL-98) were grown in
F12 complete medium + 10%FBS. Cells were incubated in serum-free
control media  Ad-IGF-1 or Ad-LacZ for 48 hours. MOIs of 10:1 and 100:1
were utilized. The RNA expression of System A transporters SNAT1 and 2,
the System L transporters LAT1, 2 and 2F4hc and the glucose transporters
GLUT1 and 3 was analyzed by qPCR. Protein expression was analyzed by
Western blot. Data were analyzed by ANOVA and a P value less than 0.05
was considered signiﬁcant.
Results: Transfection of BeWo cells at an MOI of 10:1 did not alter the RNA
expression of any of the transporters compared to non-transfected or AdLacZ (MOI 10:1) cells. However, at an MOI of 100:1, Ad-IGF-1 transfection
signiﬁcantly (p<0.05, n¼3 per treatment) increased the RNA expression of
SNAT1 and 2, LAT1 and 4F2hc compared to both non-transfected cells and
those transfected with AdLacZ by 20-50%. In contrast, LAT2 RNA expression
was reduced by 25% following Ad-IGF-1 compared to both non-transfected
and LacZ treated cells (p¼0.039, n¼3). The glucose transporters GLUT1 and
3 showed no changes in RNA or protein expression with Ad-IGF-1 or AdLacZ transfection.
Conclusion: Ad-IGF-1 transfection increases amino acid but not glucose
transporter gene expression and may represent one placental mechanism
by which IGF-1 corrects fetal growth restriction in the animal models of
placental insufﬁciency.
Keywords: Amino acid transport, IUGR

A.77

[P2.44]
DIFFERENCES IN PLACENTAL INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTOR-II DISTRIBUTION IN PREGNANT DIABETIC RATS
S San Martin*1,2, J Varas1, G Iñiguez3, S Toledo1, A Moller1 et al, 1Universidad
de Valparaiso, Chile, 2CREAS, Chile, 3IDIMI, Chile
Introduction: Diabetes is associated with complications during the
pregnancy in the mother, placenta and/or the fetus. In the placenta (fetalmaternal interface) is where nutrients and wastes exchange occurs. Fetal
survival and growth depending on somatotroﬁc growth factors (IGFs
system). Similarly to humans, diabetes in pregnant rats promotes placentomegaly. However, it is not known if diabetes during pregnancy in this
species induces changes on the IGFs system.
Objectives: To determine whether maternal diabetes promote differences
on placental IGF-II distribution in rats.
Material and Methods: Single injections of alloxan (40 mg kg i.v.) were
used to induce diabetes on day 2 of pregnancy in Wistar rats. Placentas
were collected on days 14, 17 and 20 postcoitum (dp). We used immunoperoxidase technique to identify IGF-II in placental sections; the reaction was visualized and captured with a CX81 microscope and DP71 digital
camera (Olympus). IGF-II positive cells in the labyrinth regions of these
placentas were count using Image ProPlus software. Differences were
established using Stata 10 software.
Results: In normal and diabetic gestations the presence of IGF-II positive
cells in placenta diminished during pregnancy (14, 17 and 20 dp). However,
in diabetic placentas we observed a higher number of IGF-II positive cells
on days 14dp (722 vs 382, respectively) and 17dp (361 vs 26 1,
respectively) compared to normal gestation.
Conclusion: Fetal demand for nutrients is genetically regulated by the
level of growth factors as IGF-II. The high presence of IGF-II in speciﬁc
regions of the rat placenta observed in our diabetic model could be related
to placentomegaly as a compensatory mechanism in growth restricted
gestations.
Acknowledgment: Fondecyt 106-1082 and Dipuv 07/2008; CI 05/2006
(Universidad de Valparaíso, Chile) and CONICYT (ACT-73), Chile.
Keywords: IGF-II, Placenta, Rat, Diabetes

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.78

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.45]
INSULIN INCREASED ADENOSINE TRANSPORT IN HUVEC FROM GESTATIONAL DIABETIC PREGNANCIES INVOLVE INCREASED EXPRESSION
AND ACTIVITY OF HENT1
F Westermeier*, C Salomón, P Casanello, L Sobrevia, Cellular and Molecular
Physiology Laboratory (CMPL) & Perinatology Research laboratory (PRL),
Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical Research Centre (CIM),
School of Medicine, Faculty of Medi, Chile
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) from gestational diabetes
exhibit reduced adenosine uptake. Expression and activity of the human
equilibrative nucleoside transporters 1 (hENT1) are decreased in HUVEC
from gestational diabetes, as well as in HUVEC from normal pregnancies
exposed to insulin. We studied insulin effect on hENT1 activity and
expression and the contribution of insulin receptor isoforms A (IR-A) or B
(IR-B) in HUVEC from gestational diabetes.
Methods: Cells were exposed (8 hours) to insulin (0.1-10 nM) and [3H]
adenosine transport (4 mCi/ml, 20 s, 22 C) was measured in absence or
presence of the ENTs inhibitor nitrobenzylthioinosine (NBTI, 0.01-10 mM,
30 minutes). SLC29A1 gene (hENT1) transcriptional activity was estimated
by ﬁreﬂy/renilla luciferase for pGL3-hENT13198 and pGL3-hENT11670
constructs (-3198 and -1670 bp from ATG), respectively. IR-A, IR-B and
hENT1 mRNA number of copies were determined by real time RT-PCR. All
experiments were performed in absence or presence of NG-nitro-L-arginine methylester (L-NAME, 100 mM).
Results: hENT1-mediated adenosine transport, mRNA expression and
protein abundance were reduced (P<0.05, two way ANOVA test) in
gestational diabetic compared with normal pregnancies. Insulin increased
hENT1-adenosine transport (SC50 ¼ 0.41  0.05 nM), protein abundance
(SC50 ¼ 0.18  0.02 nM) and mRNA expression (SC50 ¼ 0.23  0.04 nM) in
gestational diabetes up to values in cells from normal pregnancies. Basal
pGL3-hENT13198 activity was lower (w0.7 fold) but pGL3-hENT11670 was
higher (w1.3 fold) in cells from gestational diabetic compared with normal
pregnancies. Insulin blocked gestational diabetes effect only on pGL3hENT13198, an effect inhibited by L-NAME. Basal IR-A mRNA expression
was higher (w1.4 fold), but IR-B mRNA expression was unaltered (P>0.05)
in cells from gestational diabetes compared with normal pregnancies.
Insulin blocked gestational diabetes-associated increase of IR-A mRNA
expression.
Conclusions: IR-A isoform could be responsible of the gestational diabetes- or insulin-reduced hENT1 mediated adenosine transport in HUVEC,
a phenomenon involving NO.
Supported by FONDECYT 1070865 & 1080534, CONICYT ACT-73 (PIA),
Chile. F.W. holds a CONICYT-PhD fellowship. C.S. holds a Faculty of Medicine, PUC-PhD fellowship.
Keywords: Endothelium, Nucleoside Transporter, Gestational Diabetes,
Insulin

[P2.46]
HUMAN UMBILICAL VEIN ENDOTHELIAL CELLS EXHIBIT GLUTS-LIKE
TRANSPORT ACTIVITY MODULATED BY INSULIN
Christopher Sepulveda*, Carlos Puebla, Paola Casanello, Luis Sobrevia,
Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile
Glucose uptake is mainly mediated by sodium and insulin-independent
transport system in endothelial cells. Although insulin-sensible isoform
seems to be expressed in fetal human placenta and human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVEC). In this study we examined the effect of insulin
on D-glucose uptake in HUVEC exposed to normal or high D-glucose
concentration.
Methods: Cells were exposed (24 hours) to normal (5 mM) or high (25
mM) D-glucose in sera-supplemented culture medium 199 in absence or
presence of insulin (10 nM, 8 hours). 2-Deoxy-D-[3H]glucose (2DG) uptake
(1.6 mM 2-deoxy-D-glucose, 1 mCi/ml 2DG, 5 seconds to 5 minutes, 22 C)
was measured in the absence or presence of phloretin (GLUTs inhibitor,
100 mM, 3-24 hours).
Results: Initial rate of 2GD uptake was reduced (P<0.05, two way ANOVA
test, n¼8) by high D-glucose (32,00  3,82 versus 16,06  1,77 pmol/mg
protein/10 sec for 5 versus 25 mM D-glucose, p < 0,001), and blocked by
phloretin. Insulin increased initial rate of 2DG uptake in cells exposed to
high D-glucose (5.4-fold) reaching values in cells exposed to normal Dglucose in absence of this hormone, an effect that was blocked by
phloretin.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings show that 2DG uptake is modulated by insulin
in HUVEC, suggesting expression of functional phloretin-inhibitable
membrane transport GLUTs-like activity. In addition, HUVEC express
functional GLUTs-like transport activity that could, at least in part, be due
to the activity of an insulin-sensible D-glucose transporter in this cell type.
Supported by CONICYT ACT-73 (PIA), FONDECYT 1070865 & 1080534,
Chile. C.P. holds a CONICYT-PhD fellowship.
Keywords: glucose transport, insulin, high glucose, endothelium

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.47]
VASCULAR EFFECTS OF IGF2 ON THE FETO-PLACENTAL ENDOTHELIUM
U. Hiden1, L. Lassance1, V. Konya1, A. Heinemann1, M. Augsten1, H. Hackl2,
G. Desoye*1 et al, 1Medical University Graz, Austria, 2Medical University
Innsbruck, Austria
Objectives: IGF2 is a key growth factor for fetal development. In maternal
diabetes fetal IGF2 levels are elevated. The placental endothelium
expresses signalling receptors for IGF2, ie the insulin receptor isoform A
and the IGF1-receptor. Here we hypothesized that IGF2 acts on the fetoplacental vasculature.
We performed whole genome microarrays to identify IGF2-regulated
genes in isolated primary placental endothelial cells. Furthermore, the
effect of IGF2 on eNOS phosphorylation and on VEGF expression was
determined. As functional endpoints the IGF2-effects on in vitro angiogenesis and on electrical impedance as a marker for vascular permeability
were measured.
Methods: Placental arterial endothelial cells (6 different isolations) were
cultured with or without 10nM IGF2 for 24h. RNA was used for whole
genome analysis. eNOS phosphorylation was determined after treatment
with 10nM IGF2 for 2, 5, 10 and 45min by western blot analysis. VEGF
mRNA expression was measured after culturing the cells with 1, 10 and
100nM IGF2 for 24 and 48h. In vitro angiogenesis and electrical impedance
were monitored in the presence of 10nM IGF2 in Matrigel angiogenesis
assays and in ECIS electrode assay plates (Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing; non-invasive method continuously measuring electrical
impedance of cell monolayers), respectively.
Results: IGF2 signiﬁcantly regulated the expression of 33 genes, of which 6
were related to vascular functions. This was paralleled by the increase of
branching points (+227.3%, p<0.005) but not by tube length in the in vitro
angiogenesis. Also, IGF2 induced eNOS phosphorylation (+12370%,
p<0.05) and stimulated VEGF mRNA expression (+15.17.5%, p<0.05).
Electrical impedance and, hence, permeability was increased by IGF2
(+13.2.2.9, p<0.05).
Conclusion: IGF2 is a potent regulator of vascular functions in placental
endothelial cells. These did not only include the stimulation of angiogenesis but also novel effects on vascular permeability. Elevated levels of IGF2
in pregnancies complicated by diabetes may hence cause abnormal
vascular development and function of the placenta.
Keywords: growth factor

A.79

[P2.48]
THE EFFECT OF ANANDAMIDE ON NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE ACTIVITY
DEPENDS ON THE PRESENCE OF THE BLASTOCYST.
ML Ribeiro*1, MS Sordelli1, M Cella1, J Burdet2, R Pardo3, AM Franchi1,
CEFYBO, CONICET, School of Medicine, UBA, Argentina, 2Laboratory of
Physiopathogeny, School of Medicine, UBA, Argentina, 3Laboratory of
Molecular Physiopathology, School of Medicine, UBA, Argentina
1

Anandamide (AEA), an endocannabinoid, binds to cannabinoid receptor 1
(CB1) and 2 (CB2), besides vanilloid receptors. High concentrations of AEA
are toxic for implantation and embryo development, suggesting a relevant
role for AEA during early pregnancy. Nitric oxide (NO) is synthetized by
nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and modulates vessel formation at the
implantation sites. We have previously observed that uterine NOS activity
is inversely correlated with AEA production at the implantation period.
Thus, the aim of this study was to investigate if AEA modulated uterine
NOS activity during implantation.
Wistar rats were sacriﬁced in days 4, 5 and 6 of gestation. Implantation
occurs in the afternoon of day 5. Pseudopregnancy (psp), a model in which
the blastocyst is absent, was induced by i.p. administration of PMSG to
prepuber rats. Rats on day 5 of psp were sacriﬁced. NOS activity and CBs
expression and localization were determined in the uterus.
AEA (1 nM) inhibited NOS activity in day 5 of psp (p<0.001) and this effect
was completely reverted by the pre-incubation with SR144528 (0.1 nM),
a selective CB2 antagonist. SR141716A (0.1 nM), a selective CB1 antagonist,
had no effect. However, AEA (1 nM) increased NOS activity in the uterus
from day 5 pregnant rats (8.00.3 vs 11.10.6 fmoles L-[14C]-citruline/mg
ww/15 min, p<0.001) and this stimulatory effect was also reversed by
SR144528. Finally, both CB1 and CB2 were expressed in the rat uterus in
days 4, 5 and 6 of gestation (western blot and real time PCR) and they were
localized to the luminal endometrium.
Our results suggest that in the day of implantation, AEA effect on uterine
NOS activity depends on the presence of the blastocyst. Besides the
expression of CB1, we described for the ﬁrst time the presence of CB2 in the
rat uterus during the peri-implantation period.
Keywords: anandamide, nitric oxide, blastocyst, uterus

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.80

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.49]
THE REDUCED NOS-DEPENDENT VASODILATION IN IUGR CHORIONIC
ARTERIES IS IMPROVED BY ARGINASE INHIBITION

[P2.50]
DIFFERENTIAL MODULATION OF INSULIN RECEPTOR ISOFORMS
EXPRESSION AND NOS ACTIVITY BY INSULIN IN HUMAN PLACENTA
MICROVASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL CELLS FROM GESTATIONAL DIABETES

BJ Krause, E Muñoz, C Lavín, L Sobrevia, P Casanello*, Perinatology
Research Laboratory (PRL) & Cellular and Molecular Physiology Laboratory
(CMPL), Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical Research Centre
(CIM), School of Medicine, Faculty of Medi, Chile

Carlos salomon*, Francisco Westermeier, Paola Casanello, Luis Sobrevia,
Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile

Vascular dysfunction in Intrauterine Growth Restriction (IUGR) placenta is
associated with increased vascular tone and altered nitric oxide (NO)
synthesis by the endothelium. Arginase II is expressed in placenta and is
implicated in vascular dysfunction through a counteracting activity with
NO synthases (NOS). However, whether arginase activity has a role in
vascular function in normal and IUGR placental vessels has not been
addressed. We studied the vascular effects of arginase activity in normal
and IUGR chorionic arteries (CA).
Methods: CA from normal and IUGR placentae were dissected, and vessels
rings were mounted in a wire-myograph. Isometric force in response to
increasing concentrations of SNP (NO-donor, 10-9-10-5 M), calcitonin
gene-related peptide (CGRP, 10-10-10-7 M) with and without the NOS
inhibitor L-nitroarginine (L-NA 10-4 M) and the arginase inhibitor S-2boronoethyl-L-cysteine-HCl (BEC 10-5 M) were determined in vessels precontracted with KCl (37.5 mM). Responses were expressed as percentage of
relaxation relative to KCl-induced contraction (%Kmax) and adjusted to
concentration-response curves.
Results: Maximal KCl-induced contraction was similar in normal (2.7  0.6
N/m2) and IUGR (3.6  0.4 N/m2) CA. Relaxation in response to CGRP was
higher in control (62.0 8.6 %Kmax) compared to IUGR (32.0  9.5 %
Kmax), an effect that was completely prevented by L-NA in both samples.
BEC increased the CGRP-induced relaxation in normal (95.6  16.0 %Kmax)
and IUGR (96.00  11.0 %Kmax) CA, an effect that was blocked by L-NA. SNP
induces a similar relaxation in normal and IUGR CA (w90 %Kmax).
Conclusions: Arginases acts as NOS-counteracting enzymes in normal and
IUGR placental arteries. Since arginase inhibition induced a higher increase
in NOS-dependent vasodilation in IUGR (w3-fold) compared to normal
(w1.5-fold) CA, an imbalance in the NOS/arginase pathways in IUGR
placental vessels is proposed.
Supported by FONDECYT 1080534 & 1070865, CONICYT ACT-73 (PIA),
Chile. B.K. and E.M. hold CONICYT-PhD fellowships.
Keywords: IUGR, vasodilation, eNOS, arginase

Gestational diabetes is associated with increased placental synthesis of
nitric oxide (NO), and umbilical vein and maternal plasma level of insulin.
This hormone upregulates NO syntase (NOS) expression and activity in the
feto-placental unit. Insulin also activates insulin receptor isoforms A (IR-A)
and B (IR-B), for mitogenic and metabolic preferential responses, respectively. We studied insulin effect on IR-A and IR-B mRNA expression and
NOS activity in human endothelial cells from placenta microcirculation
(hPMEC) from gestational diabetes.
Methods. hPMEC were isolated from normal or gestational diabetic
pregnancies. NOS activity was measured by L-[3H]citrulline assay. IR-A and
IR-B mRNA number of copies were quantitated by real time RT-PCR.
Results. Basal IR-A mRNA expression was lower (65  10%, P<0.05, two
ways ANOVA test), but IR-B was higher (2.0-fold) in gestational diabetic
compared with normal pregnancies. In normal pregnancies, insulin did not
alter IR-A (P>0.05), but increased IR-B (1.9-fold) mRNA expression.
However, in gestational diabetes insulin increased IR-A (1.4-fold)
compared with normal pregnancies in absence of this hormone. However,
insulin reduced (40  10%) IR-B mRNA expression in this cell type. The
fraction of L-citrulline formation inhibited by L-NAME (i.e., indicative of
NOS activity) was higher (1.9-fold) in hPMEC from gestational diabetic
compared with normal pregnancies. Insulin reduced the gestational diabetes-associated increase of NOS activity to values in cells from normal
pregnancies in absence of this hormone, where an increased NOS activity
(1.8-fold) in response to insulin was detected.
Conclusion. hPMEC exhibit differential IR-A and IR-B mRNA expression.
We suggest that NO is involved in IR-A and IR-B isoforms modulation by
insulin in hPMEC from gestational diabetes. However, IR-B, but not IR-A
will be under NO-dependent insulin modulation in this tissue from normal
pregnancies.
Supported by CONICYT ACT-73 (PIA), FONDECYT 1070865/1080534, Chile.
C.S. holds a Faculty of Medicine, PUC-PhD fellowship. F.W. holds
a CONICYT-PhD fellowship.
Keywords: gestational diabetes, microvascular endothelium, insulin,
insulin receptor isoforms

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.51]
BRADYKININ-POTENTIATING PEPTIDE-10C INCREASES L-ARGININE
AND NITRIC OXIDE PRODUCTION IN HUMAN UMBILICAL VEIN ENDOTHELIAL CELLS FROM PREECLAMPTIC PREGNANCIES
G Benedetti1, MS Hoshida*1,2, KL Morais1, C Lameu1, LG Oliveira3, SMT
Serrano1 et al, 1Center for Applied Toxinology, Butantan Institute, Brazil,
2
School of Medicine, University of São Paulo, Brazil, 3Federal University of
São Paulo, Brazil
Introduction: Preeclampsia is a hypertensive disorder in pregnancy. The
pathogenesis of preeclampsia is not clearly established, but increased
vascular reactivity has been reported, possibly due to an imbalance in the
nitric oxide (NO) synthesis or bioavailability. The purpose of this study was
to analyze the effects of bradykinin-potentiating peptide-10c (BPP-10c),
a proline-rich decapeptide from Bothrops jararaca venom, on L-arginine
levels, Ca2+ inﬂux and NO production in Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC) from normal (HN) and preeclamptic (HPE) pregnancies. This peptide has anti-hypertensive activity independent of
inhibition of the ACE and its mechanism of action involves mainly the
activation of argininosuccinyl synthase (AsS), a rate limiting key enzyme
for the NO production in the endothelium.
Methods: HUVEC were isolated from human umbilical cords using collagenase. Quantiﬁcation of the NO production and L-arginine, AsS activity,
NOS expression, and changes in [Ca2+]i transients induced by BPP-10c
were determined.
Results: BPP-10c increased the L-arginine production in the HN, probably
by activation of AsS. It also induced signiﬁcantly higher [Ca2+]i transients
in HPE compared to HN. Regular NO production by HPE was lower when
compared to HN, however the treatment of HPE with BPP-10c increased
the levels of L-arginine, a substrate of the enzyme NOS, correcting the NO
production in HPE.
Conclusion: The fact that BPP-10c induces [Ca2+]i response differently in
HN and HPE endothelial cells, and correct the NO production by these
pathological cells makes this peptide an important tool to study the
pathophysiology of preeclampsia, and opens perspectives for the development of drugs.
Supported by FAPESP
Keywords: Preeclampsia, BPP-10c, Nitric Oxide, L-arginine, HUVEC

[P2.52]
DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSION OF ENDOCANNABINOID
PREECLAMPSIA: EFFECTS ON NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHESIS.

A.81

SYSTEM

IN

M Cella1, A Damiano2, GF Leguizamón1, ML Ribeiro1, AM Franchi1, MG
Farina*1 et al, 1CEFyBO-CONICET-UBA, Fac. Ciencias Médicas, Argentina,
2
Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, UBA, Argentina
Introduction: The endocannabinoid system has been described in human
placenta. Anandamide (AEA), a most important endocannabinoid, is
synthesized by different pathway and degraded by the action of a fatty acid
amide hydrolase (FAAH). AEA exerts part of its effects binding to CB1 or
CB2 receptors. Nitric oxide (NO) could produce the observed vascular
abnormalities in preeclampsia. Recently has been shown that AEA
modulates NO synthesis in various tissues.
Objetive: Our aim was to evaluate the differential expression of the
endocannabinoid system in preeclampsia and analyze its involvement in
regulating of NO synthesis.
Methods: Placentas were obtained from women undergoing a cesarean
section at term (NP, n¼14), who exhibietd no pregnancy complications;
and women with preeclampsia (PE, n¼14) deﬁned as high blood pressure
(140/90 mmHg after 20 week gestation) and proteinuria ( 300mg/24h),
after cesarean sections.
Results: We detected the expression of CB1 receptor in NP and PE, and
identify a decrease in activity and FAAH expression in PE, suggesting
higher levels of AEA in this tissue.
We evaluated the activity of NO synthase (NOS) and found that incubation
of NP with AEA (108, 107M) increased NO synthesis (p <0.001), and this
effect was reversed by co-incubation with an antagonist of CB1 (AM251,
106M). Later, NP were incubated with URB-597, a inhibitor of FAAH, and
NOS activity was stimulated. We found that PE placenta has larger NOS
activity and a CB1 receptor antagonist (AM251), was able to decrease the
activity of nitric oxide synthase (p <0.05).
Discussion: Our results provide new evidence that AEA is able to regulate
NOS activity in human placenta throughout the CB1 receptor and suggesting that increased levels of AEA in PE, due to the sharp decrease in the
activity and protein expression of FAAH, could be related with increased
NO synthesis observed in this pathology.
Keywords: Preeclampsia, Nitric Oxide, Anandamide, Cannabinoid
receptor 1

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.82

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.53]
PARTICIPATION OF ARGINASES IN THE VASCULAR TONE IN UMBILICAL
VEIN FROM IUGR PLACENTAE: ROLE OF THE ENDOTHELIUM AND
HYPOXIA
E Muñoz*, B Krause, C Prieto, C Lavín, L Sobrevía, P Casanello, Pontiﬁcia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile
Intrauterine Growth Restriction (IUGR) is asociated with fetal hipoxia,
lower nitric oxide (NO) synthesis by the endothelial NO synthase (eNOS)
and altered placental vascular tone. Arginase II (ArgII) has been described
to compete with eNOS for their common substrate L-arginine, leading to
vascular dysfunction. We studied the role of ArgII in the NOS-mediated
vascular effects in IUGR umbilical veins (HUV) and in HUV endothelium
(HUVEC) under hypoxia.
Methods: Normal and IUGR HUVEC were isolated by collagenase digestion
and cultured to conﬂuence at 37 C (air/CO2, 95/5); cell cultures were
exposed to normoxia (5% O2) and hypoxia (2% O2, 24 h) and harvested for
further analysis. ArgII, eNOS and p-eNOS (Ser1177) protein levels were
determined by western blot, and arginase activity was quantiﬁed by urea
formation. HUV rings were dissected from placentae and mounted in
a wire myograph to determine vasoactive response to insulin (1012-108
M), in presence or absence of the arginase inhibitor S-(2-boronoethyl)-Lcisteine (BEC 105 M) and the NOS inhibitor L-nitroarginine (L-NA 104 M).
Responses were expressed as a percentage of KCl-induced contraction
(%Kmax).
Results: In normal HUVEC, 24 h of hypoxia increased ArgII protein levels
and activity, and reduced p-eNOS/eNOS levels. In IUGR cells under normoxia ArgII level and activity were higher compared to normal HUVEC,
whilst there were lower levels of eNOS and p-eNOS, and these results were
not different under hypoxia. In IUGR HUV, the NOS-dependent relaxation
was decreased (0.1  2.5 %Kmax) compared with normal veins (37.6  3.8
%Kmax). BEC increased the NOS-dependent relaxation in IUGR (18.1  2.5
%Kmax) and normal vessels (57.5 3 .1 %Kmax).
Conclusions. The data suggest that IUGR HUVEC has a blunted response to
hypoxia. Furthermore, ArgII has a role as vascular modulator in normal
vessels, participating in the basal vascular tone as well as in a reduced
NOS-dependent relaxation in umbilical veins from IUGR placentae.
Supported by FONDECYT 1080534 & 1070865, CONICYT ACT-73 (PIA) &
AT-24090200, Chile. E.M., B.K. and C.P. hold CONICYT-PhD fellowships.
Keywords: Arginase, Vascular Tone, IUGR, Hypoxia

[P2.54]
REDUCTION OF INTRAUTERINE GROWTH RETARDATION (IUGR) IN
A HIGH-RISK GROUP WITH THE NO-DONOR PENTERYTHRILTETRANITRAT (PETN) - A PROSPECTIVE RANDOMIZED DOUBLE-BLIND PLACEBO
TRIAL
E Schleussner*1, C Kaehler3, M Bulgay-Moerschel1, U Schneider1, H Hoyer2,
T Groten1, 1Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Friedrich
Schiller University, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Statistics and Computer
Science, University Hospital Jena, Friedrich Schiller University Jena,
Germany, 3Prenatal Diagnostic Center Erfurt, Germany
Background: There is a signiﬁcant correlation between placental nitric
oxide synthesis and the uteroplacental perfusion in IUGR pregnancies. Also
it is well known that NO donors can improve decreased uteroplacental
perfusion, the major reason of placental insufﬁciency, without any effects
on fetal circulation (Kahler et al. 2004). We present the results of
a randomized, prospective, placebo-controlled, double-blind study to investigate whether the oral NO-donor PentalongÒ (PETN) is suitable as
a prophylactic drug in abnormal placentation.
Methods: We included 111 pregnancies presenting with abnormal
placental perfusion (bilateral notch or mean RI>0.7) between the 19th to
24th week of gestation (w.o.g.). Further risk factors (high-risk group:
history of HELLP/preeclampsia/IUGR/IUFD/placental abruption, type I
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, thrombosis/thrombophilia) were identiﬁed in 78 study participants. 53 women received PETN while 58 received
placebo. Doppler velocimetry measurements of uteroplacental and fetal
vessels and fetal growth scans were monitored biweekly with primary
endpoints being the occurrence of IUGR, premature birth and / or
preeclampsia.
Results: Our data revealed a 33 % relative risk reduction for IUGR (CI 95%
-6.5%, 58.3%) in the PETN intervention group compared to placebo. Also
PTD was reduced (RRR 63.5%; CI 95% -6.2 to 87.4) in the PETN group.
Abruptio placentae was observed in 5 patients of the placebo group (9%)
and did not occur in the PETN group. Within the ﬁrst week of intake, PETN
improved uteroplacental perfusion signiﬁcantly in comparison to placebo
(mean PI 1.26  0.36 vs. 1.49  0.44; p< 0.01).
Conclusion: These data strongly suggest evidence that PETN is a feasible
drug to signiﬁcantly improve pregnancy outcome in pregnancies at risk for
the development of placental insufﬁciency and subsequent growth
restriction and preterm birth
Kahler C, Schleussner E et al Europ J Gynaecol Obstet RB 2004; 115: 10-14
Lees C et al. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 1998 Nov;12(5):334-8
Keywords: NO donor, IUGR, Preterm delivery, abnormal placental
perfusion

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.55]
DECIDUAL IL-8 STIMULATES NEUTROPHIL INFILTRATION AND DIFFERENTIATION IN THE SECOND TRIMESTER
CE Dunk*1, A Hazan1,2, SJ Lye1,3, JCP Kingdom1,2, H Amsalem1,4, 1Samuel
Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada,
2
Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada,
3
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hadassah-Hebrew
University Medical Centers, Jerusalem, Israel
The maternal decidual leukocyte populations play crucial roles in the
decidual vascular remodeling accompanying normal placentation. Our
preliminary FACS study of these populations over the 1st and 2nd
trimesters identiﬁed a novel population of neutrophils speciﬁc to the 2nd
trimester. The aim of this study was to further phenotype the decidual
neutrophil (DN) population in comparison to peripheral blood (PBN) and
to determine if the decidua could drive neutrophil recruitment from the
peripheral circulation.
2nd trimester leukocytes were isolated from either decidual tissues or
peripheral blood by mechanical mincing or histopaque centrifugation
respectively. FACS analysis using Anti CD66b, CD15 (neutrophil markers),
CD45 (common leukocyte antigen), CD181, CD182, CD183 and CD184
(chemokine receptors) was performed. Matching decidual biopsies were
immunostained for CD66b, neutrophil elastase, and cytokeratin and HLAG. We also tested the potential of decidual derived IL-8 to stimulate
extravasation of primary 2nd trimester PBN in vitro.
FACS analysis showed that 10-20% of the total CD45+ cells (leukocytes) in
the second trimester decidua are neutrophils. These DN differ from PBN in
that they express high levels of CD66b whilst the IL8 receptors CD181 and
182 are decreased. Conversely CD183 and 184 are increased in DN.
Immunostaining conﬁrmed the presence of neutrophils within decidua
basalis. Aggregates of neutrophils were seen within the decidual stroma in
areas containing EVT. Neutrophils were observed adhered to endothelium
and inﬁltrating the vascular wall. We further showed that 2nd trimester
decidua conditioned medium can stimulate PBN to invade and transverse
a monolayer of endothelial cells and that this was inhibited by 60%
following neutralisation of IL8.
This study indicates the peripheral blood origin of decidual neutrophils
and identiﬁes decidual Il-8 as a primary recruiting stimulus for these cells.
Recent data suggests that neutrophils contribute to tumour driven
angiogenesis suggesting a similar role for these cells in the decidua
Keywords: Neutrophil, Decidua, Invasion, IL-8

A.83

[P2.56]
CAN INFLAMMATION INDUCED BY LPS AFFECT MIF EXPRESSION AT
MATERNAL-FETAL INTERFACE?
K. F., Nascimento*1, M. R. , Faria1, E. A. V., Ferro2, L., Paulesu3, E., Bevilacqua1,
Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil, 2Universidade Federal de Uberlândia,
Brazil, 3Universita degli studi di Siena, Italy

1

Introduction: Data from the literature show that serum MIF concentration
is positively correlated with the severity of bacterial infection in humans.
Moreover, deletion of the MIF gene in mice seems to confer protection
against lethal endotoxemia. MIF has also been demonstrated at maternal
fetal interface in several species where it is supposed to counter regulate
the anti-inﬂammatory glucocorticoid activities. In this study, we investigated the presence of MIF at maternal-placental interface in pregnant
females in which inﬂammation has been induced by administration of LPS
on early gestation in CD-1 mice. We speciﬁcally aimed to determine
whether the inﬂammatory conditions change the MIF-producing cellular
population at the implantation sites in fetuses that have survived to the
infection.
Material and methods: Immunolocalization of MIF was performed in
implantation sites from gestation days 7.5 and 10.5 from pregnant females
that received LPS at the concentration 0.1mg/ g of body weight or saline as
a control.
Results: At maternal-fetal interface, LPS-treated animals exhibited few
cells reactive to MIF in comparison with controls. Trophoblast cells when
reactive were weakly stained as well as leukocytes and decidual cells.
Conclusions: The fetal survival in LPS-treated pregnant females is
certainly a consequence of multiple mechanisms of defense triggered after
infection. Our ﬁndings suggest that the reduction of MIF at maternalplacental interface may play a role in this intricate survival mechanism.
Financial support: FAPESP, CAPES and CNPq
Keywords: MIF, LPS, Trophoblast cells, inﬂammation

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.84

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.57]
THE RETROVIRAL ENVELOPE PROTEIN SYNCYTIN-1 IS IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE AND HAS HIJACKED THE EXOSOMAL PATHWAY IN THE
HUMAN PLACENTA
JM TOLOSA*1,2, JE Schjenken1, VL Clifton3, R Smith1, 1University of Newcastle, Australia, 2Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Chile, 3University of
Adelaide, Australia
The human placenta expresses the endogenous retroviral envelope protein
syncytin-1 that promotes fusion of trophoblast cells. Many retroviral
envelope proteins are immunosuppressive due to the presence of a highly
conserved sequence called the Immunosuppressive Domain (ISD) and
syncytin-1 carries a sequence homologous to this ISD. The human placenta
also produces and secretes exosomes. Placental exosomes have recently
emerged as immune regulators that may help to circumvent maternal
immune-surveillance during pregnancy. According to “The Trojan exosome hypothesis”, retroviruses may exploit the exosome biogenesis
pathway. In light of this information, we hypothesized that syncytin-1 has
immunosuppressive properties and is released by the placenta using the
exosomal pathway.
A synthetic peptide and the soluble recombinant ectodomain of syncytin-1
which both carry the ISD were tested in vitro using human whole blood
cultures challenged with LPS or PHA. Supernatants were assayed for TNFa, IFN-g and CXCL10 using commercial ELISA kits. Exosomes were puriﬁed
from the supernatant of placental explant cultures by differential centrifugation followed by sucrose cushion and gradient methods. Exosomes
were conﬁrmed by TEM and buoyant density in sucrose gradients. Exosomal proteins were extracted and analyzed by western blotting with two
antibodies against syncytin-1.
Both the synthetic peptide and syncytin-1 recombinant protein inhibited
in a dose dependent manner the released of TNF-a by human blood cells
following maximum stimulating doses of LPS (10mg/ml). At 1mM, syncytin1 recombinant ectodomain inhibited the release of the inﬂammatory
cytokines TNF-a (50%), IFN-g (30%) and the release of the chemokine
CXCL10 (65%) which is involved in Th1 immune responses and allograft
rejection.
The present study shows for the ﬁrst time, experimental evidence in favor
of syncytin-1 having an immunosuppressive role. Also we present novel
evidence that syncytin-1 has hijacked the placental exosome pathway. The
presence of syncytin-1 in human placental exosomes present a novel
mechanism of retroviral mediated immunosuppression that may be relevant in maternal immune tolerance towards feto-placental antigens.
Keywords: Endogenous retrovirus, Syncytin, exosomes, immunosuppresion

[P2.58]
STUDYING A NEW PROTEIN AT MATERNAL-FETAL INTERFACE, SDF-2
AR Lorenzon*1,2, CR Guzzo3, M Gormley2, SC Farah3, SJ Fisher2, E Bevilacqua1 et al, 1Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, Brazil, Brazil, 2Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, School of Medicine,
University of California San Francisco, United States, 3Department of
Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo, Brazil
Introduction: Using a Signal Sequence Trap Method (SST) Hamada et al.
(1996) have isolated the cDNA encoding of a novel, probably secretory,
protein from the stroma cell line ST2 and named it Stromal cell derived
factor 2, Sdf2. They determined the complete nt sequences of this mouse
and human protein and showed a high homology between them. The
characteristics of the presumptive amino acid sequence are similar of
chemokines. Therefore, it is interesting to speculate whether SDF-2 is
acting at maternal-fetal interface in diverse aspects of placenta.
Methods: The gene coding for Sdf2 was subcloned into the pET-3a vector
and expressed in E. coli strain BL21 StarÔ(DE3)pLysS. The protein was
produced in growing cultures of the E. coli strain and was then puriﬁed.
Anti-mouse polyclonal antibody was obtained from rabbits immunized
with the protein associated to Freud's Adjuvant. Western Blot and q-PCR
were used for protein and gene expression, respectively.
Results: In mouse, the protein was detected in several tissues and gene
expression showed to be temporally regulated during gestational phases,
exhibiting high levels of expression during implantational phase. In
human, protein was detected by Western Blot during 1st and 2nd trimester
of gestation.
Discussion: Our preliminary results showed that Sdf2 is expressed in
mouse and human placenta, which may be associated to developmental
and dynamic placental functions. However, functional assays are still in
progress to support this hypothesis.
Supported by FAPESP and CNPq
Keywords: Trophoblast, SDF-2, Placenta, Blastocyst

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.85

[P2.59]
DECIDUAL CELL SURFACE AND SECRETED (PARACRINE) FACTORS
REGULATE TROPHOBLAST FUNCTION

[P2.60]
CRIPTO-1: A TUMORAL MARKER AT THE MATERNAL-PLACENTAL
INTERFACE

E Menkhorst*, P Li, K Meeehan, A Rainczuk, A Stephens, E Dimitriadis et al,
1
Prince Henry's Institute, Australia, 2Centre for Women's Health Research,
Australia

CL Bandeira*1, A Albieri-Borges2, MS Hoshida1, GM Santelli1, LC Porto2,
E Bevilacqua1, 1São Paulo University, Brazil, 2State University of Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil

Extravillous trophoblast (EVT) must adhere, migrate and invade through
the decidua to form a functional placenta. Abnormal decidualization of
endometrial stromal cells (ESC) leads to unregulated trophoblast invasion
and pregnancy failure in mice. Recent evidence in humans suggests that
preeclampsia is associated with impaired decidualization. The mechanisms by which decidual cells interact with EVT remain largely unknown.
We aimed to determine whether decidualized and non-decidualized
human (H) ESC regulated EVT adhesion, and identify EVT proteins regulated by decidualized and non-decidualized HESC secreted factors.
Primary HESC were decidualized with cAMP+estradiol 17b+progesterone
and prolactin (decidual marker) measured by ELISA. HESC conditioned
media (CM) was collected from Days (D) 0-2 (non-decidualized) and
D12-14 (decidualized) of treatment. Cytotrophoblast were isolated from
1st trimester placenta and cultured on Matrigel for EVT. EVT were ﬂuorescently labeled and adhesion to decidualized and non-decidualized
HESC assayed ﬂuorimetrically. EVT proteins <30kD were puriﬁed using
size exclusion afﬁnity particles (SEAN) and identiﬁed by mass
spectrometry.
EVTs showed increased adhesion to decidualized compared to nondecidualized HESC (184.545% vs 100% respectively, n¼5; p<0.05). EVT
treated with non-decidualized CM expressed 11 unique proteins, including
4 not previously shown in the placenta and 3 dysregulated in
preeclampsia. EVT treated with decidualized CM showed 12 unique
proteins, 7 not previously identiﬁed in the placenta and 3 dysregulated in
preeclampsia. This demonstrates that decidualized/non-decidualized
secreted factors differentially regulated EVT proteins. Galectin-7 and
proﬁlin-1 (both associated with cell migration) were identiﬁed for the ﬁrst
time in EVT and immunolocalized to interstitial EVT in 1st trimester
decidua.
These data suggest that cell surface and secreted decidual cell factors
regulate EVT function. It also suggests that the extent of decidualization is
a critical factor in human EVT function as in mice. In conclusion, adequate
decidualization may be critical for appropriate EVT function and therefore
placental development in humans.
Keywords: EVT, Decidua, Secretion, Invasion

The intense invasive activity of the trophoblast into the mesometrial
decidua is a determinant event of placental development. Many signaling
factors are likely to play a role in regulating the trophoblast invasion in
a similar way to the regulation of metastasis in tumor cells. One of the
many factors that have been shown as potential candidate for invasion
marker is Cripto 1, early detected in over eighty percent of breast invasive
carcinomas and undetectable in normal human breast tissue. In this
context, considering the parallel between invasive trophoblast and cancer
cells, our research aimed to analyze Cripto1 (Cr1) gene expression and
protein content at the maternal-placental interface.
Methods: Tissue extracts from ectoplacental cones (gestation day 7.5) and
placentas (gds 10.5, 13.5 and 17.5) were collected in Ripa buffer and Trizol
for Western Blotting and RT-PCR analyses, respectively.
Results: Our results showed that Cr1 was expressed during placental
development at the maternal-placental interface. The protein content
increased gradually in the fetal compartment as gestation progressed and
decreased in decidua after gd13.5. Semi-quantitative evaluations of Cr1 by
PCR were indicative of low expression at the post-implantation and ﬁnal
gestational periods in both, the maternal and fetal compartments. Significant increase was seen at gd10.5 (vs gd7.5, p<0.04) and mainly at gd13.5
(vs gd7.5, p<0.00). Cr1 expression at the maternal-placental interface
throughout gestation is indicative of a relevant role for this factor during
placental maturation, chieﬂy when several cell types (trophoblast, endothelial and immune cells) are migrating through the decidua. The question
of whether Cripto acts on regulatory pathways that particularly mediate
the invasive processes of trophoblast cells is the current goal of our
research.
Supported by: CNPq and FAPESP
Keywords: Cripto-1, Trophoblast, Decidua, Maternal-placental interface

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.86

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.61]
SNMCL-1 PROTEOLYTIC ISOFORM REGULATES CELL GROWTH DURING
PLACENTAL DEVELOPMENT AND IN PLACENTAL PATHOLOGIES

[P2.62]
PRESENCE OF T REGULATORY CELLS LAP+ IN RENAL TRANSPLANTED
PREGNANT WOMEN

Alessandro Rolfo1,2, Manpreet Kalkat1, Tullia Todros*2, Isabella Caniggia1,
1
Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto (ON),
Canada, 2Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Turin, Turin,
Italy

Simone Correa-Silva*, Leandro Oliveira, Niels Camara, Estela Bevilacqua,
University of São Paulo, Brazil

Introduction: Mcl-1 (Myeloid cell leukaemia factor 1) is a pro-survival
Bcl-2 family member that plays a key role in both placental development
and in trophoblast-related pathologies by governing trophoblast cell fate.
Recent evidence indicates that a C-terminus truncated Mcl-1 isoform,
termed small nuclear Mcl-1 (snMcl-1) is expressed in the nucleus where it
interacts with the cell-cycle-dependent kinase CDK-1 thereby preventing
its binding to Cyclin B1 thus inhibiting cell cycle progression. Herein, we
examined the temporal and spatial expression of snMcl-1 and its association to CDK-1 during placental development and in placental pathologies
preeclampsia (PE) and Intra Uterine Growth Restriction. (IUGR).
Methods: Placenta developmental tissues (5-15 weeks, n¼21) and
placental tissues from PE (n¼24), IUGR pregnancies with documented
AEDF (n¼16) and pre-term controls (PTC, n¼14) were used. Protein levels
were measured by immunoblotting using CDK-1 and Mcl-1 antibodies.
CDK-1/Mcl-1 association and localization were assessed by immunoﬂuorescence followed by deconvolution microscopy.
Results: CDK-1 and Cyclin B1 proteins showed a peak of expression at 5-8
weeks of gestation which inversely correlated to snMcl-1 expression
proﬁle. Immunoﬂuorescence revealed strong positive CDK-1 and Cyclin B1
signals in the cytotrophoblastic nuclei during early gestation, while Mcl-1
was mainly localized in the cytoplasm of syncytiotrophoblast cells. With
advancing gestation (9-15 weeks), CDK-1/Mcl-1 co-localization was found
in the nuclei of cytotrophoblast cells. Notably, while Mcl-1/CDK-1 colocalization was increased in PE cytotrophoblast cells relative to PTC, no
association was observed in IUGR tissues.
Discussion: During early placentation high CDK-1/Cyclin B1 levels found
in the trophoblastic nuclei may account for increased trophoblast proliferation rates; while, with advancing gestation, increased CDK-1/snMcl-1
nuclear association implicates a novel role for Mcl-1 as an inhibitor of
trophoblast cell cycle progression. In preeclampsia, increased CDK-1/Mcl-1
association in trophoblast cells may contribute to altered trophoblast
proliferation typical of this pathology. (Supported by CIHR and OWH/IGH).
Keywords: small nuclear Mcl-1, Placenta Development, Preeclampsia,
IUGR

Introduction and Objective: Immunological tolerance is a key for
successful maternal-fetal interaction and transplantation. Regulatory T
cells are important components of homeostasis of the immune system, as
impaired Treg cell activity is associated with decreased tolerance in these
conditions. CD4+CD25+CTLA-4+ T cells have been reported as suppressors
of other T cells by cell-to-cell interactions and secretion of cytokines like
IL-10 and TGF-b. Previous report showed that CD4+CD25+ T cells are
capable of producing TGF-b either as a secreted or a cell surface protein
(LAP). Pregnancy after solid organ transplantation is no longer uncommon,
especially in the view of the recent advances in surgery and immunosuppressant. Thus, understanding that the tolerogenic immune microenvironments may shed light on mechanisms of tolerance and strategies of
immune modulation that are beneﬁcial for both gestation and the graft
survival, in this study we aimed to characterize CD4+CD25+ CTLA-4+T cells
in pregnant women after renal transplantation, a condition closely related
to long-term immunossupression. In addition, the levels of IL-10 and TGF-b
were also investigated
Methods: PBMC was obtained from renal transplanted and healthy
women pregnancies in the third trimester. Expression of CD4+CD25+CTLA4+LAP+ and CD4+CD25+CD127lowCTLA-4+ were identiﬁed through ﬂow
cytometry. IL-10 was measured by CBA and TGF-b levels were obtained by
ELISA.
Results and Conclusion: Renal transplanted pregnant women exhibited
lower levels of CD4+CD25+CD127lowCTLA-4+, IL-10 and TGF-b, but higher
levels of CD4+CD25+CTLA-4+LAP+. These results seem to identify LAP as
a putative mechanism of tolerance in these populations.
Keywords: T regulatory cells, TGF-beta, maternal-fetal tolerance, renal
transplant

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.87

[P2.63]
CLINICAL, IMMUNOLOGICAL AND THROMBOPHILIC FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH RECCURENT SPONTANEOUS ABORTION AND MULTIPLE
IMPLANTATION FAILURE AND THEIR OUTCOMES AFTER TREATMENT

[P2.64]
EVIDENCES OF UTERINE-NATURAL KILLER CELL SECRETORY-LYSOSOME
GRANULE MEDIATED CYTOLYTIC RESPONSE IN THE MATERNAL-FETAL
INTERFACE

R Noronha*1, C Rizzo1,3, T Schiavo2,3, R Adamy2,3, J Neumann3, T Michelon3,
1
Centro Universitário Metodista IPA, Brazil, 2Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Brazil, 3Centro de Imunologia da
Reprodução, Brazil

Patrícia Lima*, Cecília Copi, Karina Degaki, Aúreo Yamada, UNICAMP, Brazil

Introduction: Antiphospholipid antibodies (APA), hereditary thrombophilias (HT) and immunological factors have been treated in reccurent
spontaneous abortion (RSA) and multiple implantation failure (MIF).
Objective: To compare clinical, immunological and thrombophilic factors
associated with RSA and MIF, describing their live birth rates after
intervention.
Methods: Analysis included 175 RSA (2 clinical pregnancy losses) and
178 MIF (2 fresh embryo transfers) patients and live birth outcome study
in 102 and 148 women, respectively. Investigation included APA, HT,
paternal lymphocyte crossmatch and NK endometrial cells quantiﬁcation
during the secretory phase (CD56+16). Patients received treatment with
paternal lymphocyte alloimunization (PLA) and/or intravenous imunoglobulin (IVIg). Considered signiﬁcant P0.05 (OR/RR, CI95%).
Results: Groups had same average age, number of previous events and APA
prevalence (RSA:21.7% x MIF:18.5%). MIF had higher HT prevalence
(RSA:20.6% x MIF:30.3%; P¼0.035, OR¼1.7[1.0-2.7]). RSA had lower NK
rates (RSA:39;716.0 x MIF:46.817.6; P¼0.000) and less patients with
>60%NK (RSA:10.7 x MIF:22.8%; P¼0.003). Overall birth rate was
RSA:71.6% and MIF:45.3%. RSA with APA got higher successful rate than
negative ones (26.0% x 6.9%; P¼0.031, RR¼4.7[1.0-21.0]). RSA birth rates for
immunological treatment were: PLA:72.4%, IVIg:81.8% and 60.0% with both
after previous failure under single treatment. In MIF, 7 natural pregnancies
(4.7%) occurred with 85.7% birth. For patients who underwent a new
embryo transfer, outcomes were: 43.3% birth, 9.2% abortion and 5.7%
biochemical pregnancy. Birth rates were higher in MIF treated with IVIg
compared to PLA (80.0% x 38.9%; P¼0.004, RR¼2.1[1.5-2.9]).
Conclusion: Immunological and thrombophilic causes are common in RSA
and MIF, and immunological treatment seems suitable. Physiopathology of
both conditions probably has distinct pathways, suggested by the HT and
higher endometrial NK cells association with MIF. Despite the lack of strict
selection criteria for immunological treatment, IVIg seems to be the choice
for MIF patients, needing more controlled trials.
Keywords: antiphospholipid antibodies, pregnancy failure, reccurent
spontaneous abortion, multiple implantation failure

Mouse uterine natural killer (uNK) cell is an unique CD3-CD122+ NK1.1DX5- subset of cytokine producing NK cell with secretory-lysosome
granules that participate in the modulation of homeostasis for successful
pregnancy. Contents of cytolytic molecules in the secretory-lysosome
granules of uNK cells is well known, but their mobilization in the innate
immune type cytolytic response in the pregnant uterus is still speculative.
The present work investigated the capability of uNK cells secretorylysosome granules mobilization as response under stimuli of abnormal
pregnancy provoked by embryo disruption. Pregnant mice on gd 9th, were
anesthetized and embryos were surgically disrupted introducing needles
through the antimesometrial side of uterine wall. Sham operated animals
and embryo disrupted (ED) uterine fragments were collected after 15, 30,
60 and 120 minutes of ED and processed for light and electron microscopy.
Dolichos biﬂorus lectin (DBA), periodic acid Shiff (PAS) and ponthamine
blue (PB) cytochemistry and perforin immunocytochemistry were positive
in the core region (secretory compartment) of uNK cells granules, while
cathepsin D immunocytochemistry was positive in the cap region
(lysosome compartment). Cross analysis of double staining showed
heterogeneity of granule contents suggesting phenotype heterogeneity of
uNK cells and/or granule maturation step during uNK cell differentiation.
The ultrastructure of granules changes as soon as 15’ of ED with disruption
of membrane, losing of secretory and compactness of lysosomal
compartments. Mobilization of granules contents were not equal for all
components being the DBA lectin and perforin diffusion seen as soon as
15’, while both PAS and PB contents gradually decreased in the core of
granules after 30’ of ED and latterly followed by cathepsin D of lysosome
compartment. In conclusion, this is the ﬁrst experimental approach
showing evidences of uNK cell innate immune type response capability
based on commitment of secretory-lysosome granules.
Grants: CNPq and CAPES.
Keywords: uterine Natural Killer cells, secretory-lysosome granule, innate
immune response

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.88

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.65]
IMMUNE CELL CHARACTERISATION IN PREGNANCIES COMPLICATED BY
ASTHMA
A Osei-Kumah1, D Krumbiegel2, I Nicholson2, R Goose2, N Hodyl1,
V Clifton*1 et al, 1Robinson Institute, University of Adelaide, Australia,
2
Women's and Children's Health Research Institute, Australia
Introduction: During pregnancy, we have shown that the asthma exacerbation rate is high, increasing the risk of an adverse neonatal outcome,
including intrauterine growth restriction, preterm delivery and still birth.
In a majority of cases exacerbations are un-resolvable with inhaled
glucocorticoid treatment, suggesting pregnancy changes the asthma
phenotype to a form that is non-responsive to asthma treatment. This may
be related to maternal adaptations in immune pathways that occur with
pregnancy. In normal pregnancy, maternal circulating immune cells
undergo modiﬁcations in cell concentration, phenotype and function over
the course of pregnancy. However little is known about how this adaptation in pregnancy is inﬂuenced by the presence of maternal asthma. We
aim to characterise leukocyte sub-populations and phenotypes in blood
collected from pregnant non-asthmatic and asthmatic women.
Hypothesis: We propose that maternal asthma worsens during pregnancy
due to altered leukocyte phenotypes, including increased monocyte
CD14dimCD16+ subset and disturbances in T cell subsets particularly Tregs,
Th1 and Th2.
Methods: Venous blood was collected from pregnant asthmatic subjects (n
¼10) and controls (n ¼10) at 12, 18 and 30 weeks gestation. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PMBCs) were isolated at all three time points.
Multi-parameter ﬂow cytometry analysis using appropriate antibody pairs
was used to determine T cell and monocyte subsets as summarised in the
table below.
Panel

Populations deﬁned

Panel

Populations deﬁned

1

naive and memory
CD4 T cells
central memory CD4 T cells
global TRegs
global TH17
TH0. TH1 and TH2 Subsets

3

central and effector memory
CD8 T cells
gamma-delta T cells
NK subsets cells
DC subsets
memory subsets

2
3
4
5

9
10
11
13

[P2.66]
RANDOM X INACTIVATION AND EXTENSIVE MOSAICISM IN HUMAN
EXTRA-EMBRYONIC TISSUE REVEALED BY ANALYSIS OF ALLELESPECIFIC GENE EXPRESSION ALONG THE X CHROMOSOME
JCM de Mello*1, ESS Araujo1, S Stabellini1, AM Fraga1, JES Souza2, AA
Camargo2 et al, 1Laboratório de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil, 2São Paulo Branch, Ludwig
Institute for Cancer Research, Brazil
Transcriptional inactivation of all but one X chromosome per diploid cell in
females’ mammals ensures dosage compensation of X-linked gene products between the genders. In marsupial somatic cells and in murine extraembryonic tissues, XCI is imprinted and the paternal X is preferentially
inactivated. In contrast, in embryonic cells of Eutherian mammals, either
the paternal or the maternal X is randomly inactivated. In human extraembryonic tissues, results concerning XCI patterns are still controversial,
and are mostly based on the analysis of only one or two X-linked genes in
different cell types. Here we readdressed this issue by performing a robust
analysis of allele-speciﬁc expression of 22 X-linked genes, including XIST,
along the entire X through cDNA direct sequencing to investigate the
patterns of XCI in 18 human term placenta. The contribution of each allele
to X-linked gene expression was quantiﬁed using the PickPeaker software1. Six samples presented predominantly monoallelic expression,
indicating a completely skewed pattern of XCI. Five placentas, however,
displayed biallelic expression in the majority of loci examined, suggesting
random XCI. Other seven samples showed skewed XCI, where for almost
every gene examined one allele had higher level of expression than the
other. As results varied greatly among samples we wondered if the
placenta behaves as a mosaic concerning X inactive parental origin. To test
this hypothesis, different fragments were collected in non-adjacent
regions of three additional placentas, revealing that XCI pattern in this
organ is random, and indeed occurs as a mosaic of relatively large patches
with either maternal or paternal XCI. The variability found on individual
samples in this work can ﬁnally explain the lack of agreement among
previous studies, and our model of the placenta as a mosaic of large
patches proposes a solution to those puzzling results previously reported.
1. Genome Research, 2005. 15:1584-91
Keywords: Placenta, X-chromosome inactivation, Mosaicism, Allelespeciﬁc expression

Results: Our preliminary analysis demonstrated that there were no
differences in T cell subtypes in control and asthma group as pregnancy
progressed. However there were differences in monocyte subsets with
differential expression of activation marker HLA-DR (P < 0.05) in the
asthmatic group. The expression of ‘pro-inﬂammatory’ monocyte phenotype CD14dimCD16+ was also indentiﬁed in some asthmatic subjects.
Discussion: Circulating monocytes are heterogeneous in phenotype and
function. CD14dim CD16+ phenotype expands during infection and
inﬂammatory response. The differential expression of leukocyte subsets in
pregnancies complicated by asthma may be part of the mechanism
contributing to worsening asthma during pregnancy.
Keywords: immune cells, pregnancy, asthma, activation markers

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.67]
DNA METHYLATION PROFILING OF HUMAN PLACENTAS
PREECLAMPSIA AND INTRA-UTERINE GROWTH RESTRICTION

WITH

R Yuen*, M Peñaherrera, P von Dadelszen, D McFadden, W Robinson,
University of British Columbia, Canada

A.89

[P2.68]
EXAMINING GENE: ENVIRONMENT INTERACTIONS IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PLACENTAL EPIGENOME: GENOME-WIDE ANALYSIS OF
PLACENTAS FROM 16 TWIN PREGNANCIES.
B Novakovic*1,2, L Gordon3, M Ollikainen1, E Joo1,2, HK Ng1, J Craig1,2 et al,
Developmental Epigenetics Group, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia,
2
Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Australia, 3Clinical
Epidemiology and Biostatistics Unit, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, Victroria 3052, Australia
1

Preeclampsia and intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR) are two of the
most common adverse pregnancy outcomes, both of which often show
placental pathology with signiﬁcantly increased perinatal morbidity and
mortality. Identiﬁcation of biomarkers that could be used to diagnose
abnormal outcomes during early pregnancy would be a major step forward
in antenatal care. While multiple studies have investigated gene expression changes in these disorders, few studies have examined their epigenetic changes. DNA methylation is a chemically stable epigenetic
modiﬁcation of DNA that may provide an alternative approach to identifying potential biomarkers for such disorders. We investigated 1505 CpG
methylation sites associated with 807 genes in 26 placentas from earlyonset preeclampsia (EOPET), late-onset preeclampsia (LOPET), IUGR and
control subjects using an Illumina GoldenGate Methylation microarray.
Hierarchical clustering of the placental samples based on their DNA
methylation proﬁles shows that the samples were preferentially clustered
by gestational age. For the case-control comparisons, thirty-four loci were
hypomethylated (false discovery rate <10% and methylation difference
>10%) in the early-onset preeclamptic placentas, while no and only 5
differentially methylated loci were found in late-onset preeclamptic and
IUGR placentas, respectively. Hypomethylation of 4 loci in EOPET was
further conﬁrmed by bisulﬁte pyrosequencing of 26 independent placental
samples. Our results suggest that gene-speciﬁc hypomethylation may be
a common phenomenon in EOPET placentas and it may act as a potential
biomarker for the disorder. Furthermore, DNA methylation proﬁle of
placenta may change dramatically throughout gestation.
Keywords: DNA methylation, Preeclampsia, Intra-uterine growth restriction, Programming

The Developmental Origin of Health and Disease (DoHAD) hypothesis
predicts that many adult diseases have their origin in utero. This was ﬁrst
proposed to describe the observed link between low birth weight and
increased risk of cardiovascular disease in later life 1. Given its location at
the fetomaternal interface, the human placenta plays a critical role in
mediating environmental effects associated with this programming
phenomenon.
Epigenetic modiﬁcations, such as DNA methylation, play a major role in
controlling gene expression. Mounting evidence suggests an elevated level
of inter-individual variation in DNA methylation proﬁle in full term
placenta relative to somatic tissues. However, mechanisms underlying this
variation remain unclear. We speculate that this results from a combination of both genetic and environmental factors, which combine during
pregnancy to modulate the level of methylation present at speciﬁc gene
promoters.
Studying twins allows researchers to begin to unravel the contributions of
genetic and environmental inﬂuences on DNA methylation patterns. As
part of the Peri/Postnatal Epigenetics Twins Study (PETS), we have
collected multiple birth specimens from 250 twin pairs (including
placenta), representing one of the largest collections of such tissues
internationally. In the current study, DNA methylation proﬁling of placenta
tissue from sixteen twin pairs (50% Monozygotic) was analysed using the
Illumina Inﬁnium HumanMethylation27 platform, proﬁling over 27,000
genomic CpG sites.
Unsupervised cluster analysis revealed that sex was the biggest determinant of overall placental methylation proﬁle. Whereas twin placentas
generally show a higher correlation of DNA methylation proﬁle than nonrelated individuals, there are exceptions, with some twins showing
markedly different proﬁles. Monozygotic twins showed a higher correlation than dizygotic twins, highlighting the contribution of genetic factors
to the establishment of the placental epigenome. However, evidence for an
environmental and/or stochastic contribution to methylation proﬁle was
also apparent.
1 Barker et al. BMJ 2010
Keywords: DNA methylation, Twins, Environment, Genetics

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.90

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.69]
GENOME-SCALE DNA METHYLATION ANALYSIS OF SEVEN COMMONLY
USED TROPHOBLAST CELL LINES

[P2.70]
DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION OF FETAL AND MATERNAL MESENCHYMAL STEM CELLS FROM THE HUMAN PLACENTA

B Novakovic*1,2, L Gordon1, J Craig1,2, R Saffery1,2, 1Developmental Epigenetics Group, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's
Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia, 2Department of
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Australia, 3Clinical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics Unit, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's
Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, Victroria 3052, Australia

SQ Qin*1, RA Pace1, MD Pertile2, SP Brennecke1, B Kalionis1, 1The University
of Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology and Department
of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre, Royal Women's Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 2Cytogenetics Laboratory, Victorian Clinical
Genetics Services, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia

Given the inability of primary trophoblasts to divide in culture, trophoblast-derived cell lines have become an important tool for studying
speciﬁc aspects of trophoblast function. Several widely used cell lines have
been established, each with its own unique functional characteristics and
origin. In the current study we compared genome-scale DNA methylation
patterns in ﬁrst trimester cytotrophoblasts to 7 commonly used trophoblast cell lines, with the aim of identifying epigenetic marks involved in
conferring speciﬁc functional properties of trophoblast cells.
The 7 cell lines used in this study were immortalized HTR8, TEV-7, SWAN
and four choriocarcinoma (CCA) lines (AC1M32, BeWo, JAR and JEG-3).
Genome-scale DNA methylation analysis was performed using the Illumina Inﬁnium HumanMethylation27 platform, which analyses 27,578 CpG
sites covering 14,595 genes. Locus-speciﬁc DNA methylation analysis was
performed using the Sequenom EpiTYPER platform. Gene expression
analysis was performed using the ABI 7300 Real-time platform.
Unsupervised clustering of the most variable Inﬁnium probes separated
cell lines into 4 groups ‘CCA’, ‘SWAN and TEV-7’, ‘Cytotrophoblasts’ and
‘HTR8’. Most of the highly variable probes showed hypermethylation in
CCA relative to other cells, suggesting a role in tumorigenesis rather than
trophoblast function.
Speciﬁc comparison of the JEG-3 and BEWO cell lines has revealed several
DNA methylation mediated gene silencing events in BEWO, some of which
may explain the proliferation differences between these cell lines. Current
studies are aimed at identifying epigenetic silencing events associated
with speciﬁc properties of trophoblast functioning.
This study complements earlier studies demonstrating gene expression
differences between trophoblast-derived cell lines, and highlights the
range of molecular differences between these model cell lines and primary
trophoblast cells.
Keywords: DNA methylation, Choriocarcinoma, Trophoblast cell lines

The term placenta is a source of both fetal (1) and maternal (2) mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). While both types of placental MSCs (PMSCs)
have been studied, the differences between the PMSCs have yet to be
examined. A major challenge in this ﬁeld has been obtaining pure fetal
MSCs (3). This study investigated the transcription factor expression
patterns of pure fetal and maternal PMSCs.
Fetal and maternal PMSCs were prepared from the normal term placenta
of a male fetus. Flow cytometry for MSC markers and XY ﬂuorescence in
situ hybridisation and karyotyping was carried out to determine the purity
of the PMSC populations. RNA was extracted and Taqman homeobox low
density arrays were carried out and differences in gene expression were
conﬁrmed using realtime PCR. Cardiomyogenic differentiation was carried
out using 10uM 5-Azacytidine.
Both populations of PMSCs showed >90% positivity for CD105, CD73 and
were negative for CD45. FISH analysis conﬁrmed that the PMSC populations are 100% male (fetal) or 100% female (maternal) respectively. A
number of differences in gene expression were identiﬁed. WT1 mRNA was
only expressed in maternal PMSCs, while GATA4 was expressed only in
fetal PMSCs. GATA6 mRNA levels were also much higher in fetal PMSCs.
GATA4 realtime PCR on 5 more samples conﬁrmed that GATA4 expression
was either absent or very low in maternal PMSCs (p<0.05, n¼5). As both
GATA6 and GATA4 are important regulators of cardiomyocytes, cardiomyogenic differentiation was carried out in fetal PMSCs. Preliminary
results show marked increases in the mRNA level of cardiac markers
Troponin T, GATA4 and Alpha actinin 1.
This is the ﬁrst study to investigate gene expression differences between
fetal and maternal PMSCs and demonstrates how such differences could
inﬂuence future therapeutic applications.
1. Fukuchi, Y., H. Nakajima, et al. (2004). "Human placenta-derived cells
have mesenchymal stem/progenitor cell potential." Stem Cells 22(5):
649-58.
2. Barlow, S., G. Brooke, et al. (2008). "Comparison of Human Placenta- and
Bone Marrow–Derived Multipotent Mesenchymal Stem Cells." Stem Cells
and Development 17(6): 1095-1108.
3. Semenov, O. V., S. Koestenbauer, et al. "Multipotent mesenchymal stem
cells from human placenta: critical parameters for isolation and maintenance of stemness after isolation." Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(2): 193 e1-193
e13.
Keywords: Mesenchymal stem cells, fetal, maternal, gene expression

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.91

[P2.71]
TRANSCRIPTOME ANALYSIS OF SYNCYTIAL KNOTS SHED FROM THE
HUMAN PLACENTA

[P2.72]
CHANGES IN GENE EXPRESSION ASSOCIATED WITH TROPHOBLAST
DEATH AND SHEDDING

O J Holland*, L W Chamley, The University of Auckland, New Zealand

P Pantham*1, Q Chen1, CG Print2,3, LW Chamley1, 1Department of Obstetrics
& Gynaecology, The University of Auckland, New Zealand, 2Department of
Molecular Medicine & Pathology, The University of Auckland, New
Zealand, 3Bioinformatics Institute New Zealand, The Univeristy of
Auckland, New Zealand

In human pregnancy the surface layer of the placenta is the multinucleated
syncytiotrophoblast. Throughout pregnancy portions of the syncytiotrophoblast are shed into the maternal blood as syncytial knots. Currently
the mechanisms involved in the shedding of trophoblasts are not well
characterised. We hypothesise that syncytial knots contain a limited
transcriptome, but that some expressed genes will be important the death
or extrusion of the knots. In this study we have begun to determine the
transcribed genes (transcriptome) of syncytial knots shed from placental
explants.
Eight hundred and sixteen syncytial knots shed from 18 ﬁrst trimester
placentae were collected by direct pipetting from beneath explants
cultured in Netwells. RNA was extracted from the syncytial knots and run
on the Experion automated electrophoresis system (BioRad). The RNA was
transcribed into cDNA and prepared for analysis on the 454 GS FLX high
throughput sequencing system (Roche).
A total of 2.30 nanograms of RNA was extracted from the knots, equating to
an average of 2.82 picograms of RNA per syncytial knot. The RNA recovered
from the knots had a broad electrophoretogram sample peak, indicative of
degradation. However, several individual peaks were detected, suggesting
intact RNA species were present. Individual transcribed genes have not yet
been identiﬁed.
Syncytial knots shed from normal placentae are generally considered to be
undergoing apoptosis, and therefore to have little ongoing protein
synthesis. We found that syncytial knots express low levels of RNA, indicating that they are dying. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that
identiﬁcation of the transcriptome of shed syncytial knots has been
attempted. Though we have not yet been able to identify speciﬁc transcripts our data are beginning to shed light on molecular events involved
in trophoblast shedding, and may have implications in diseases associated
with the deportation of trophoblasts, such as preeclampsia.
Keywords: transcriptome, syncytial knot, RNA, deportation

During normal pregnancy, trophoblasts die by an apoptosis-like process
and are shed into the maternal blood. In preeclampsia however, it is
hypothesised that the trophoblast death process changes to necrosis or
aponecrosis, and that this alteration leads to an aberrant maternal
response to the dead trophoblasts. Maternal factors associated with
preeclamptic pregnancies such as antiphospholipid autoantibodies (aPL)
and interleukin-6 (IL-6) have recently been shown by our group to cause
an increase in non-apoptotic trophoblast death and shedding in vitro. We
hypothesised that treating placental explants with aPL or IL-6 would lead
to speciﬁc gene expression changes. In order to investigate this, we
examined the gene expression proﬁles of ﬁrst-trimester placental explants
that had been treated either with a monoclonal aPL (25mg/mL) or IL-6
(10ng/mL) using Affymetrix HGU133 Plus 2.0 arrays. Fifty-one genes were
up-regulated and 66 genes down-regulated in explants treated with the
aPL, compared to control-antibody treated explants. Explants treated with
IL-6 displayed an up-regulation of 43 genes and a down-regulation of 110
genes. Although there were no regulated genes common to both treatments, several genes involved in apoptotic signalling were dysregulated,
including TNFSF10, Fas ligand, and Bcl-x, implicating apoptosis in the
trophoblast death and shedding processes. Expression levels of genes
previously implicated in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia, such as PTEN
and von Hippel Lindau tumour suppressor, were altered in the IL-6 treated
explants. This analysis demonstrated that treating placental explants with
either IL-6 or aPL resulted in surprisingly little change in the transcriptome
of the explants. Other researchers have suggested that cell death can occur
in the absence of major transcriptional changes and our results are
consistent with that suggestion. Despite the limited changes in the transcriptome our results begin to provide an insight into the genes involved in
trophoblast death and shedding.
Keywords: Microarrays, Apoptosis, Antiphospholipid antibodies, Trophoblast death and shedding

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.92

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.73]
METABOLOMIC PROFILING OF CORDONAL BLOOD IN INTRAUTERINE
GROWTH RESTRICTED FETUSES
S Visentin*, E Cosmi, SD Ferrara, D Favretto, E Ragazzi, M Tucci et al,
University of Padua, Italy
Objective. Fetal growth restriction (FGR) is the failure of the foetus to
reach its growth potential that continues to be a major contributor to
perinatal morbidity and mortality with an increased risk to develop adultonset disease. The aim of the present study was to investigate the
metabolomic proﬁle of FGR fetuses through a non-targeted metabolomic
liquid chromatography high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS)
analysis of cordonal blood collected at birth to identify any alterations in
the fetal and/or placental metabolism.
Methods. Cordonal blood samples were collected at birth from 32 FGR
neonates and 32 appropriate for gestational age neonates (AGA). Serum
samples were deproteinised by mixing with methanol at room temperature and centrifugation. Supernatants were lyophilized and reconstituted
in water to analysis. LC-HRMS analyses were performed using an Orbitrap
mass spectrometer hyphenated to a Surveyor Plus LC. Samples were
injected on a 1.0 x 150 mm Luna C18 column. Spectra were collected in full
scan mode at a resolution of approximately 30.000. Data were acquired
over the m/z range 50-1,000 with measurements performed in triplicate.
To observe metabolic variation between the two sets of samples, we ﬁtted
a Principle Component Analysis (PCA) model on the LC-HRMS data.
Results. FGR neonates had a statistically lower birth weight than AGA. A
large number of features (ionic species with speciﬁc retention times) were
shown to differ between the two classes of samples. By comparison with
available databases two main differentially expressed metabolites
(phenylalanine and tryptophan) were detected. Logistic regression
coupled to a Receiver Operating Characteristic curve identiﬁed a cut-off
value for phenylalanine and tryptophan, which gave an excellent
discrimination between FGR and AGA (sensitivity ¼ 100%; speciﬁcity ¼
75%).
Conclusions. The non-targeted metabolomic LC-HRMS analysis of cordonal blood collected at birth appears a promising tool for the identiﬁcation
of potential biomarkers of FGR.
Ramo: proteomica
Keywords: IUGR, metabolomica, phenylalanine, tryptophan

[P2.74]
STUDY OF PROTEINS YOLK SAC BY PROTEOMICS ANALYSIS
A.C.R. Galdos*1, M.V.L. Alberto1, R.E.G. Rici1, D.A. Maria2, R.Z. Mendonça2,
M.A. Miglino1, 1University of São Paulo, Brazil, 2Institute Butantan, Brazil
The extra-embryonic membranes are the link of maternal-fetal communication, which will form the placenta, a vital organism for the fetal
development and growth. The yolk sac is a membrane which plays an
important role in embryonic development, mainly the initial stages of
hematopoiesis. While the actual placenta isn't formed yet, during the
embryonic development, the yolk sac is the main source of nutrition for
the embryo, what makes it a place of transference and synthesis of
proteins. These molecules rule almost all cellular functions and are, from
the chemical point of view, the biological molecules most complex structured. The proteomic is the large scale study of proteins of a biologically
complex sample. The aim of this work was the structural analysis and
initial biochemistry of proteins from approximately 23 and 37 days of
pregnancy of the yolk sac bovine. From 2D-PAGE gels, the samples of
proteins in 37 days of pregnancy yolk sacs revealed about 1230 proteins
and the gels of 23 days of pregnancy samples revealed about 970 proteins.
In the gels, good reproducibility and high degree of comparison between
the two stages of the placenta are revealed. These proteins will be vital to
the embryo's development until the formation of the placenta, furthermore they help in the understanding of many mother-fetus relations, in
which phase many events may lead to alterations in the development of
this membrane and, consequently, to phenomena which harm the
placentation and normal development of the embryos.
Keywords: Placenta, Proteins, Yolk sac, Proteomics analysis

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.75]
LXR-ACTIVATING OXYSTEROLS SUPPRESS 11-HYDROXYCHOLESTEROL
DEHYDROGENASE TYPE 2 IN HUMAN TROPHOBLAST CELLS THROUGH
A POST-TRANSCRIPTIONAL MECHANISM INDEPENDENT OF LXR AND
PROTEASOME-MEDIATED PROTEIN DEGRADATION
H. Guan, K. Choi, K. Yang*, The University of Western Ontario, Canada
The placental 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 has emerged as
a key player in controlling fetal development, but its regulation is
incompletely understood. Given that both LXRa and LXRb are expressed in
the human placenta where high concentrations of natural LXR ligands
oxysterols (also known as hydroxycholesterols) are present, the present
study was designed to test the hypothesis that LXR-activating oxysterols
regulate placental 11b-HSD2 using primary human trophoblast cells as an
in vitro model system. We demonstrated that treatment of trophoblast
cells for 24 h with 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol (22(R)-HC) resulted in
a concentration dependent decrease in 11b-HSD2 activity, such that a 70%
reduction was observed at 10 mM. The inhibitory effect of oxysterols on
11b-HSD2 activity was conﬁrmed with the use of another LXR-activating
oxysterol, 25-hydroxycholesterol (25-HC). However, the synthetic LXR
agonist T0901317 had no effect, suggesting that the effect of oxysterols on
11b-HSD2 in human trophoblast cells is mediated through a novel mechanism independent of LXR. Furthermore, we showed that although 22(R)HC did not alter the level of 11b-HSD2 mRNA, it caused a signiﬁcant
decrease in 11b-HSD2 protein levels, indicating that 22(R)-HC downregulated 11b-HSD2 at a post-transcriptional level. In addition, the
mechanism underlying this reduction in 11b-HSD2 protein is unlikely to
involve proteasome-mediated protein degradation, since treatment of
trophoblast cells with the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 did not abrogate
the inhibitory effect of 22(R)-HC on 11b-HSD2 activity. Taken together,
these ﬁndings suggest that LXR-activating oxysterols suppress 11b-HSD2
in human trophoblast cells through a post-transcriptional mechanism
independent of LXR and proteasome-mediated protein degradation. Given
that high concentrations of oxysterols are present in the human placenta
where their function is largely unknown, our present study also reveals
11b-HSD2 as an important target by which oxysterols may regulate human
placental function, and consequently fetal development.
Keywords: Fetal development, Placental function, Glucocorticoid actions
and metabolism, LXR and oxysterols

A.93

[P2.76]
MATERNAL GLUCOCORTICOID EXPOSURE ALTERS PLACENTAL GENE
EXPRESSION DIFFERENTLY, DEPENDING ON THE SEX OF THE FETUS
B.A. O'Connell*1, K.M. Moritz2, C.T. Roberts3, D.W. Walker1, H. Dickinson1,
1
Monash Institute or Medical Research, Australia, 2School of Biomedical
Sciences, Australia, 3Robinson Institute, Australia
Introduction: Differences between the sexes have been found with
respect to morbidity and mortality during pregnancy, with male fetuses
being at higher risk of negative outcomes associated with placental
insufﬁciency, pre-eclampsia, and birth asphyxia. Here we investigated the
effects of maternal stress on the placenta, produced by administering
dexamethasone (DEX) at the time the placental labyrinth develops in the
spiny mouse.
Methods: Dams were exposed to DEX (125mg/kg) or saline (75ml) for 60h
via osmotic pump from gestation d20 (term is d39). Placentas were
collected immediately after treatment (d23) and processed for histology or
qPCR. Relative sizes of labyrinth and junctional zone (JZ) were determined
and expression of Bax, Bcl2, Vegfa, Vegfr2, Gcm1, and Map2k1 genes was
quantiﬁed. Differences between groups was analysed by 2-way ANOVA for
treatment (PTREAT), and sex (PSEX).
Results: DEX reduced the proportion of labyrinth to JZ in the placenta
(PTREAT<0.05). DEX caused an increase in Map2k1, which was greater in
females (PSEX<0.0001, PTREAT<0.001, PINT<0.001). Vegfa expression was
higher in DEX-exposed placentas, but was higher in females irrespective of
treatment (PSEX<0.01, PTREAT<0.05, PINT¼NS). The DEX treatment
increased the Bcl2:Bax ratio, but signiﬁcantly more so in female placentas
(PSEX<0.05, PTREAT<.0.0001, PINT<0.01).
Discussion: Maternal DEX exposure for 60h altered gene expression and
structural development of the placenta. Sexually dimorphic responses
were observed in genes important in the expansion of the labyrinth region
(Map2k1) and the ratio of pro- and anti-apoptosis (Bcl2:Bax). Thus, the
placenta at mid-gestation is sensitive to a relatively brief exposure to high
maternal GC, such as may occur during maternal stress. The consequences
of these gene changes on placental function remain to be elucidated.
Keywords: Spiny mouse, Dexamethasone, Labyrinth Development

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.94

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.77]
ADENOSINE TRANSPORT IS MEDIATED BY DIFFERENT NUCLEOSIDE
TRANSPORTERS IN NON-DIFFERENTIATED AND DIFFERENTIATED
HUMAN ENDOTHELIAL PROGENITOR CELLS
E Guzmán*1,2, L Lamperti1, C Salomón2, B Krause2, L Sobrevia2, C Aguayo1,
1
Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Concepción, Chile, 2Cellular and Molecular Physiology
Laboratory (CMPL) & Perinatology Research laboratory (PRL), Division of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical Research Centre (CIM), School of
Medicine, Faculty of Medi, Chile
Extracellular adenosine removal is via human equilibrative nucleoside
transporters 1 (hENT1) and hENT2 in the endothelium, thus regulating
adenosine-induced revascularization and angiogenesis. Since human
endothelial progenitor cells (hEPCs) promote revascularization, we
hypothesize differential expression of nucleoside transporters in hEPCs.
Methods: hEPCs from peripheral venous blood from healthy adults were
cultured 3 (hEPC-3d) or 14 (hEPC-14d) days. RT-PCR for prominin 1, CD34,
octamer-4, kinase insert domain receptor, oxidized low-density lipoprotein (lectin-like) receptor 1 and tyrosine endothelial kinase was used to
evaluate phenotypic differentiation. Flow cytometry was used to estimate
CD34+/KDR- (non-differentiated), CD34-/KDR+ (differentiated) or CD34+/
KDR+ (mixed) cell populations. Adenosine transport (0-65 mM, [3H]adenosine, 4 mCi/ml, 20 s, 22 C) was measured in absence or presence of
sodium, S-(4-nitrobenzyl)-6-thioinosine (NBTI, 1-10 mM, hENTs inhibitor),
inosine, hypoxanthine or guanine (0.1-5 mM). hENTs protein abundance
was determined by western blot and hENTs, hCNT1, hCNT2 and hCNT3
mRNA expression by real time RT-PCR. Hill coefﬁcient for Na+ dependency
of adenosine transport was determined.
Results: hEPC-3d CD34+/KDR- population was higher (w7-fold) than
hEPC-14d cells, which were predominantly CD34-/KDR+. hEPC-3d cells
exhibit hENT1-like adenosine transport (NBTI sensitive, Na+-independent),
which is absent in hEPC-14d cells. hEPC-14d cells exhibit two transport
components: component 1 (NBTI insensitive, Na+-independent) and
component 2 (NBTI insensitive, Na+-dependent, Hill coefﬁcient w1.8), the
latter resembling CNT3-like transport. hEPC-3d cells express hENT1
protein and mRNA, which is reduced (w90%) in hEPC-14d cells, but instead
only hCNT3 mRNA is expressed in this cell type. hENT2, hCNT1 and hCNT2
were undetectable in hEPCs.
Conclusions: hEPCs exhibit a differential expression of hENT1 and hCNT3
functional nucleoside transporters related with its differentiation stage.
Supported by FONDECYT 11070035, 1070865 & 1080534, CONICYT ACT-73
(PIA), Chile. E.G-G. and B.K. hold CONICYT-PhD fellowships. C.S. holds
a Faculty of Medicine, PUC-PhD fellowship.
Keywords: Adenosine Transport, Adenosine Transport

[P2.78]
DELINEATING THE FIRST STAGES OF MESODERM COMMITMENT
DURING DIFFERENTIATION OF HUMAN EMBRYONIC STEM CELLS
Denis Evseenko*1, Yuhua Zhu1, Katja Schenke-Layland2 et al, 1University of
California Los Angeles (UCLA), David Geffen School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and Broad Stem Centre, United States, 2University of
California Los Angeles (UCLA), David Geffen School of Medicine, Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, United States
Our understanding of how mesodermal tissue is formed, has been limited
by the absence of speciﬁc and reliable markers of early mesoderm
commitment. We report that mesoderm commitment from human
embryonic stem cells (hESC) is initiated by Epithelial to Mesenchymal
transition (EMT) as shown by gene expression proﬁling and by reciprocal
changes in expression of the cell surface proteins, EpCAM/CD326 and
NCAM/CD56. Molecular and functional assays reveal that CD326negCD56+
cells, generated from hESC in the presence of activin A, BMP4, VEGF and
FGF2, represent a novel, multi-potent mesoderm-committed progenitor
population. CD326negCD56+ progenitors are unique in their ability to
generate all mesodermal lineages including hematopoietic, endothelial,
mesenchymal (bone, cartilage, fat, ﬁbroblast), smooth, skeletal muscle and
cardiomyocytes, while lacking the pluripotency of hESC. CD326negCD56+
cells are the precursors of previously reported, more lineage-restricted
mesodermal progenitors. These ﬁndings present a novel approach to study
how germ layer speciﬁcation is regulated, and offer a unique target for
modulation of stromal ontogenesis in humans.
Keywords: human embryonic stem cells, mesoderm, endothelium,
mesenchymal cells
[P2.79]
ANTI-SINEPTHELIOCHORIAL PLACENTA ANTIBODIES CONSTRUCTED BY
PHAGE DISPLAY TECHNOLOGY
Luiz Augusto Vieira Cordeiro*1, Paulo Henrique Costa Lima1, Estela Bevilacqua2, 1Semiarid Federal University, Brazil, 2University of São Paulo,
Brazil
After the ﬁrst description of construction of a antibodies gene sequences
library by phage display by Smith at 1985, a lot of different protocols, and
targets, are describe on the literature. In placenta, the ﬁrst description are
made by Schmitz and co-workers (2000) presenting the ﬁrst anti-human
placenta gene library construction. In this work, we present a anti-sineptheliochorial placenta scFv antibody gene libraries (goat, sheep and cow)
constructed by this technology. White lineage chickens was three times
immunized with placentomes. Fifteen days following immunization, the
animals were euthanized and total RNA was isolated from spleen. Firststrand cDNA was synthesized and, using speciﬁc primers, variable regions
on light (VL) and heavy (VH) antibodies chains were constructed by polimerase chain reaction . As for VL and VH, the scFv antibody fragment were
constructed by PCRs, connecting the variable parts of the immunoglobulin
via a short linker peptide. The scFv sequences were inserted in the Ph.D.C7CÔ Phage Display Peptide Library Kit. The insert-vector were replicated
in ER2738 competent bacterias. Now, researches to identiﬁcation of
epitopes and markers of trophoblast cells are performing like related in
others publications.
Keywords: Placenta, Phage Display, Sineptheliochorial, scFv

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.95

[P2.80]
ANTI-PLACENTA ANTIBODIES CONSTRUCTED BY PHAGE DISPLAY
TECHNOLOGY

[P2.82]
ANTENATAL DEXAMETHASONE TREATMENT LEADS TO CHANGES IN MIF
GENE EXPRESSION IN THE DEVELOPING PLACENTA

LAV Cordeiro*1, PHC Lima1, M Kadyrov4, AA Borges2, E Bevilacqua2, HG
Frank3, P Kaufmann1, 1Semi-arid Federal University, Brazil, 2University of
São Paulo, Brazil, 3AplaGen GmbH, Germany, 4Institut für Anatomie der
RWTH Aachen, Germany

MR Faria*1, EAV Ferro2, L Paulesu3, E Bevilacqua1, 1Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of
Morphology, Federal University of Uberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil,
3
Department of Physiology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy

After the ﬁrst description of construction of a antibodies gene sequences
library by phage display by Smith at 1985, a lot of different protocols, and
targets, are describe on the literature. In placenta, the ﬁrst description are
made by Schmitz and co-workers (2000) presenting the ﬁrst anti-human
placenta gene library construction. In this work, we present a anti-placenta
scFv antibody gene libraries (mouse ectoplacental cone, goat, sheep and
cow) constructed by this technology. White Leghorn chickens was
immunized with ectoplacental cone tissue and placentomes. Fifteen days
following immunization, the animals were euthanized and total RNA was
isolated from spleen. First-strand cDNA was synthesized and, using speciﬁc
primers, variable regions on light (VL) and heavy (VH) antibodies chains
were constructed by polimerase chain reaction . As for VL and VH, the scFv
antibody fragment were constructed by PCRs, connecting the variable
parts of the immunoglobulin via a short linker peptide. The scFv sequences
were inserted in the Ph.D.-C7CÔ Phage Display Peptide Library Kit. The
insert-vector were replicated in ER2738 competent bacterias. Now,
researches to identiﬁcation of epitopes and markers of trophoblast cells
are performing like related in others publications.

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) was originally identiﬁed for
its capacity to inhibit the random migration of macrophages in vitro. This
cytokine plays special roles as pro-inﬂammatory factor affecting mainly
functions of macrophages and lymphocytes and as the ﬁrst physiologic
counter-regulator of the glucocortocoid effects on the immune response.
In spite of being a pro-inﬂammatory cytokine recent evidences also
suggest a critical role for MIF during human and mice implantation and
early embryonic development. On the other hand, exogenous glucocorticoids exert many actions that could impact negatively on key aspects of
early pregnancy like inhibition of cytokine-prostaglandin signaling,
restriction of trophoblast invasion, induction of apoptosis and inhibition of
embryonic and placental growth. Therefore, the overall goal of this study
has been to determine whether antenatal dexamethasone treatment leads
to changes in Mif gene expression in a murine early placenta. For this,
a total of twelve pregnant females mice on 10.5 gd were divided in four
groups of tree animals each and were injected with intra peritoneal
dexamethasone at a dose of 0.25 mg/Kg, 0.5 mg/Kg, 1.0 mg/Kg or received
equivalent amount of saline to serve as controls. Thirty minutes after
injection animals were sacriﬁced, placentas were separated from maternal
tissues and the samples analyzed by RT-PCR and qRT-PCR. Our preliminary
results show that placentas from animals injected with dexamethasone
have lower mRNA expression when compared with control samples in an
inverse correlation with the used dose (0.25 mg/Kg, p¼0.0024; 0.5 mg/Kg,
p¼0.0022). This inverse relationship might be indicating that placental Mif
does not play roles as a glucocorticoid counter-regulator at maternal-fetal
interface, as occurs in other organs.
Financial support: FAPESP, CAPES and CNPq
Keywords: MIF, Cytokine, Trophoblast, Placenta

[P2.81]
UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC-PROCESSING PROTEASE 22 (USP22) GENE IS
EXPRESSED IN TROPHOBLAST AND CHORIOCARCINOMA CELLS
Carmen Tam-Amersdorfer, Ursula Hiden, Julia Fröhlich*, Anton Sadjak,
Nassim Ghaffari Tabrizi, Medical University Graz, Austria
Introduction: Proteases perform essential functions in all living organisms. They act as processing enzymes that perform highly selective, limited
and efﬁcient cleavage of speciﬁc substrates, which initiates irreversible
decisions at the post-translational level that inﬂuence many biological
processes. In an attempt to ﬁnd proteases that are expressed in different
stages of trophoblast development we found USP22 to be highly expressed
in trophoblast and chorioncarcinoma cells. USP22 is a ubiquitin hydrolase
that is present within the human SAGA transcriptional co-activator
complex. Here we show the trophoblast speciﬁc expression of this enzyme.
Methods: The expression of USP22 in trophoblasts and chorion carcinomas was determined using RT PCR. The ampliﬁed fragment was isolated,
cloned and veriﬁed by sequencing. This fragment was used for in situ
hybridization on placenta sections.
Results: USP22 mRNA could be ampliﬁed in both ﬁrst trimester and term
placental tissue as well as in isolated trophoblasts and chorion carcinoma
cell lines BeWo, JEG3 and JAR. Using in situ hybridization with a speciﬁc
probe USP22 could be localized on trophoblasts in ﬁrst trimester and term
placental tissue, with predominance on vilous and extravilous cytrotrophoblasts. No expression could be detected in invasive trophoblasts in
the decidua.
Discussion: USP22 is a histone deubiquitinating component of the transcription regulatory histone acetylation complex SAGA. It catalyzes the
deubiquitination of both histones H2A and H2B, thereby acting as a coactivator. It is recruited to speciﬁc gene promoters by activators such as MYC,
where it is required for transcription. USP 22 is also required for nuclear
receptor-mediated transactivation and cell cycle progression. USP22 is also
discussed to be a potential cancer stem cell marker. We suppose that
USP22 and the SAGA complex have an important role in trophoblast
development.
Keywords: trophoblast, protease, stemm cell marker, in situ hybridization

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.96

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P2.83]
EXPRESSION OF FOXO4 IN HUMAN PLACENTA
MEMBRANES: EFFECT OF HUMAN LABOUR AT TERM

AND

FETAL

M Lappas1,2, C Riley1, G Barker3, G Rice*3, M Permezel1,2 et al, 1University of
Melbourne, Australia, 2Mercy Hospital for Women, Australia, 3cUniversity
of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research, Australia
Introduction: We have previously identiﬁed Forkhead box O1 (FoxO1)
proteins in human gestational tissues, and demonstrated a casual link
between FoxO1 and rupture of fetal membranes. There is, however, no data
on FoxO4 in human intrauterine tissues, or their expression during human
term labour. The aim of this study was to characterises the localisation and
expression of FoxO4 in human placenta and fetal membranes before and
after term spontaneous labour onset.
Methods and Results: The cellular localisation of FoxO4 protein in human
placenta and fetal membranes (combined amnion and choriodecidua) was
performed by immunohistochemistry. FoxO4 staining in the placenta was
moderate and was conﬁned to the syncytiotrophoblast layer. Cytoplasmic
FoxO4 staining was also detected in the trophoblast layer of the chorion;
more so in the basal layer than the superﬁcial layer. There was no FoxO4
staining within the villous structure, placental endothelium, amnion
epithelium and cells within the spongy layer of the fetal membranes.
Decidua exhibited weak FoxO4 staining that was both cytoplasmic and
nuclear. To determine the effect of human labour on FoxO4 expression,
qRT-PCR, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry was performed on
placenta, amnion and chorion before and after term labour. Placenta and
fetal membranes were obtained at Caesarean section before the onset of
labour (pre-labour) and after spontaneous labour and membrane rupture
(post-labour). Amnion and chorion were obtained from the SCS in the prelabour samples and from along the rupture line in the post-labour samples.
FoxO4 mRNA and protein expression were signiﬁcantly lower after labour
in placenta and fetal membranes.
Discussion: In summary, human term labour is characterised by decreased
FoxO4 mRNA and/or protein expression in placenta and fetal membranes.
While the precise role and contribution of FoxO4 in the process of human
fetal membrane rupture are unknown, it has been implicated in apoptosis
and/or cell cycle regulation.
Keywords: Placenta, Fetal membranes, Human labour, FoxO4

[P2.84]
SILENCING OF CASPASE 8 IN BEWO SUPPRESSES BETA-HCG INDUCTION
N.S. Rote*, C. Xu, L. Luo, B-R Wei, Case Western Reserve University, United
States
In the human placenta, transition from mononuclear villous cytotrophoblast into multinuclear syncytiotrophoblast is characterized by the
induction of hCG and intercellular fusion. The role of apoptotic-related
proteins, particularly caspase 8, in the differentiation process has elicited
intense investigation. We have reported that a polycaspase inhibitor did
not affect syncytialization or hCG production in differentiating BeWo,
a choriocarcinoma model for villous cytotrophoblast differentiation. To
investigate the role of procaspase 8 we produced stable transfectants that
expressed siRNA targeted to procaspase 8; in clone C8-4 procaspase 8
protein and mRNA were diminished (94.8% and 85%, respectively). A
control clone was stably transfected with vector alone (vector). Forskolininduced fusion of clone C8-4 was delayed for 24 hr, but not suppressed. By
48 hr of treatment, fusion (mean % of nuclei in syncytial cells  SD) of the
vector control cells (47.2  9.5) exceeded that in clone C8-4 (27.2  7.8;
P ¼ 0.01). By 72 hr the vector control had reached the maximum level of
fusion (87.5  5.0), but C8-4 was signiﬁcantly less (53.2  15.4; P < 0.05).
The C8-4 line reached maximum fusion at 96 hr of forskolin treatment
(vector control: 87.1  1.8; C8-4: 85.4  3.5; P ¼ NS). Expression of hCG was
more severely affected; in forskolin-treated C8-4 the level of beta-hCG
protein was signiﬁcantly depressed at all time points (depressed 72% at 24
hr, P ¼ 0.02; 62% at 48 hr P ¼ 0.003; 70% at 72 hr P ¼ 0.0005; 55% at 96 hr, P
¼ 0.005) and never reached the levels measured in the vector control. The
effects on beta-hCG mRNA expression were less pronounced; mRNA was
suppressed by 52% at 72 hr (P < 0.01) and by 38% at 96 hr (P < 0.02). Thus,
the proform of caspase 8 may be an essential participant in the differentiation-related induction of hCG, but plays a minor role in syncytialization.
Keywords: BeWo, intercellular fusion, hCG, caspase 8

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

Poster session 3 (P3.1 - P3.83)
[P3.1]
HOMEOBOX GENES ARE DIFFERENTIALLY EXPRESSED IN PRIMARY
VILLOUS AND EXTRAVILLOUS TROPHOBLAST CELL LINEAGES DURING
EARLY PREGNANCY
P Murthi*1,2, NA Pathirage1,2, RJ Keogh1,2, M Cocquebert3,4, N Segond3,4, SP
Brennecke1,2 et al, 1University of Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Australia, 2Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy
Research Centre, Royal Women's Hospital, Australia, 3Université Paris
Descartes, France, 4PremUP Foundation, Paris, France
During human placental development trophoblast cells differentiate along
either the villous cytotrophoblast (VCT) lineage to form the syncytiotrophoblast (ST) or the invasive extravillous cytotrophoblast (EVCT)
lineage (1). Abnormalities in early differentiation processes are characteristic of poor placentation, which is associated with fetal growth
restriction (FGR) and pre-eclampsia (PE), the major clinical complications
of human pregnancy (2). A large family of homeobox gene transcription
factors controls “cell-fate decisions” during development (3), but the
expression proﬁle and role of homeobox genes in the human trophoblast
cell lineages is not well understood. The aim of the study was to determine
homeobox gene expression in primary cultures of mononuclear VCT (2h)
and EVCT (2h) obtained from ﬁrst trimester human chorionic villi of 8-12
weeks of gestation and in vitro differentiated ST (72h) and invasive EVCT
(48h), respectively. The isolation and characterization of freshly isolated
VCT, EVCT and in vitro differentiated ST and invasive EVCT were performed
as described previously (1,4). The homeobox gene mRNA proﬁle was performed using PCR arrays in a pooled sample of VCT and EVCT (n¼6 in each
group) and further validated by real-time PCR. Homeobox gene expression
studies revealed MSX2 mRNA levels were the highest in VCT (2h) but
undetectable in EVCT (2h). Further comparisons of homeobox gene
expression in in vitro differentiated ST to invasive EVCT showed marked
increase in MSX2, DLX3, DLX4 and MEIS1 mRNA levels in ST, which are
regulators of cellular differentiation in many studies. Homeobox genes HLX
and HHEX, which are implicated in regulating cellular proliferation showed
decreased mRNA levels in ST compared to invasive EVCT. Our results
demonstrated several known placental and novel homeobox genes are
differentially expressed in trophoblast cell lineages. Functional studies of
these candidate genes will provide a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of early placental development.
1. Tarrade et al. Lab Invest. 81, 1199- 1211 (2001)
2. LokeYW and King A Cell Biology and Immunology, Cambridge ed. (1995)
3. J Cross et al. Recent Progress in Hormone Research 57:221-234 (2002)
4. Handschuh et al. Placenta, 28, 175-184 (2007)
Keywords: trophoblast differentiation, villous and extravillous trophoblast
lineages, gene expression, placental development

A.97

[P3.2]
MICRORNAS ARE DIFFERENTIALLY EXPRESSED IN FIRST TRIMESTER
HUMAN PLACENTA
W Kong*, R Nowak, CT Roberts, JA Owens, University of Adelaide, Australia
Placental functional development is characterised by dynamic and coordinated changes in expression of genes that drive invasion, differentiation and growth. These changes may arise in part from altered expression
of microRNAs (miRNAs) via their regulatory networks. MiRNAs are short,
single-stranded, non-coding RNAs involved in the post-transcriptional
repression of gene expression. MiRNAs bind to complementary sites in the
3’UTR of target mRNAs to repress or silence translation. MiRNAs have been
detected in the mammalian placenta, but their patterns of expression
throughout pregnancy have not been systematically characterized.
Using microarrays, miRNA gene expression was compared between two
stages (6-8 weeks and 10-12 weeks) in early gestation, in chorionic villi of
human placentas. Putative and validated targets of differentially expressed
miRNAs were extracted from freely accessible databases, miRBase [1],
PicTar [2], TargetScan [3] and miRecords [4].
15 miRNAs were differentially expressed between these gestational ages
(p<0.05). 11 of these miRNAs were upregulated in 10-12 week villi and 4
were downregulated. Many of the differentially expressed miRNAs are
members of the same polycistronic clusters, suggesting that these miRNAs
may be co-expressed. Shared targets of differentially expressed miRNAs
from the same clusters were assessed using Ingenuity Pathways Analysis,
to search for signiﬁcantly represented molecular networks.
All downregulated miRNAs at 10-12 weeks shared 35 putative targets and
were in 1 of 2 clusters, on chromosome 13 or X. Previously validated
targets include PTEN [5], Notch1 [6], VEGFA [7], CDKN2A [8] and DHFR [9].
Six of the upregulated miRNAs at 10-12 weeks are members of 3 clusters
on chromosome 19, 9 and X. Networks targeted by these cluster members
include PTEN, HIF1a and IL-12 signalling. Together all of these processes
are active and important in early placentation and their predicted targeting by differentially expressed miRNAs is consistent with an important
role in placental development.
References:
1. Grifﬁths-Jones, S., et al., miRBase: microRNA sequences, targets and gene
nomenclature. Nucleic Acids Res, 2006. 34(Database issue): p. D140-4.
2. Krek, A., et al., Combinatorial microRNA target predictions. Nat Genet,
2005. 37(5): p. 495-500.
3. Lewis, B.P., C.B. Burge, and D.P. Bartel, Conserved seed pairing, often
ﬂanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targets. Cell, 2005. 120(1): p. 15-20.
4. Xiao, F., et al., miRecords: an integrated resource for microRNA-target
interactions. Nucleic Acids Res, 2009. 37(Database issue): p. D105-10.
5. Lewis, B.P., et al., Prediction of mammalian microRNA targets. Cell, 2003.
115(7): p. 787-98.
6. Fukuda, Y., H. Kawasaki, and K. Taira, Exploration of human miRNA target
genes in neuronal differentiation. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser (Oxf), 2005(49):
p. 341-2.
7. Ye, W., et al., The effect of central loops in miRNA:MRE duplexes on the
efﬁciency of miRNA-mediated gene regulation. PLoS One, 2008. 3(3):
p. e1719.
8. Lal, A., et al., p16(INK4a) translation suppressed by miR-24. PLoS One,
2008. 3(3): p. e1864.
9. Mishra, P.J., et al., A miR-24 microRNA binding-site polymorphism in
dihydrofolate reductase gene leads to methotrexate resistance. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A, 2007. 104(33): p. 13513-8.
Keywords: microRNA, microarray, ﬁrst trimester, chorionic villi

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.98

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.3]
EFFECTS OF PLACENTAL GROWTH HORMONE (PGH) ON FIRST
TRIMESTER AND TERM PLACENTAL CELL TURNOVER

[P3.4]
GLUCOCORTICOID TARGET GENES IN FIRST TRIMESTER HUMAN
PLACENTA

NJ Robinson, K Forbes, RL Jones*, University of Manchester, United
Kingdom

JL Nugent, CP Sibley, NR Charlesworth, RL Jones*, University of Manchester,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Defective placental development has a major impact on
fetal growth and is associated with fetal growth restriction (FGR). The
placenta produces a variant of pituitary growth hormone, placental growth
hormone (PGH), which acts via the growth hormone receptor (GH-R).
GH-R mRNA is expressed by the placenta suggesting PGH may have
autocrine/paracrine effects upon placental development. In pregnancies
complicated by FGR, levels of PGH are decreased compared to normal
pregnancies; it is not known whether this contributes to abnormal
placental development. We hypothesize that PGH stimulates placental
growth and development, acting through GH-R.
Method: First trimester (n¼7) and term (n ¼5) placentas were collected.
GH-R was localised by immunohistochemistry. Explants from both gestations were cultured in the presence of PGH (0, 10, 100ng/ml). The proliferative and apoptotic response of cytotrophoblast and stromal cells to PGH
was examined by immunohistochemistry for Ki67 and M30 respectively.
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release and human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG) secretion were used to assess viability.
Results: GH-R was strongly localised to the syncytiotrophoblast microvillous membrane, cytotrophoblasts and a population of stromal cells in
both ﬁrst trimester and term placenta. PGH had no effect on ﬁrst trimester
cytotrophoblast proliferation; however, stromal proliferation was signiﬁcantly elevated by 10ng/ml PGH (p0.05). At term, PGH had no effect on
cytotrophoblast or stromal proliferation. There was a trend towards
decreased cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast apoptosis with PGH at
10ng/ml at both gestations (p0.06). PGH had no effect on LDH or hCG
levels in culture medium.
Conclusion: These data conﬁrm that the placenta is a target tissue for PGH.
The stimulatory effect of PGH on stromal cell proliferation suggests PGH
may act indirectly to promote placental growth and development via the
stromal compartment. More studies are required to investigate the
mechanisms of PGH actions on placental development to elucidate its
involvement in FGR.
Keywords: Placental growth hormone, Proliferation, Apoptosis, Fetal
growth restriction

Introduction: Excessive exposure to glucocorticoids (GC) is associated
with reduced fetal growth. Animal studies implicate the placenta in
GC-induced FGR. We and others have shown that GCs alter placental cell
turnover (reduced proliferation, increased apoptosis), angiogenesis,
vascular reactivity and amino acid transport. The molecular mechanisms
underlying GC actions have not been delineated. The aim of this study was
to identify GC target genes in the placenta.
Methods: First trimester placentas (8-12 weeks) were collected following
elective surgical pregnancy termination. Placental explants were cultured
for 48 hours in the presence or absence of 1mM dexamethasone. DNA was
extracted and fetal sex determined by PCR ampliﬁcation of amelogenin
gene. RNA from placentas where the fetus was female (n¼5) was extracted,
pooled and subjected to Affymetrix GeneChip Human Exon 1.0 ST arrays in
triplicate. Candidate genes were validated by real time PCR.
Results: 44 genes were upregulated (2 to 5.6 fold) and 58 genes were
downregulated (-2 to -8.7 fold) by dexamethasone treatment. These
included inﬂammatory mediators, proteases, extracellular matrix, cell
adhesion molecules, angiogenic and growth factors, and transporter
molecules. Differentially expressed genes were selected for further studies
based on their functional properties. Downregulated candidate genes:
interleukin(IL)-1, IL-6, CCL2; fatty acid binding protein 3, Na+/K+ATPase
b polypeptide 1/3, slc7A11 cationic amino acid transporter, bradykinin
receptor B1, vascular endothelial growth factor C, heparin binding
epidemeral growth factor, transforming growth factorb-3, sphingosine-1phosphate phosphatase 2. Upregulated candidate genes: prokineticin 1,
calcium-activated potassium channel (BKCa), TIMP4, slc22A3 monoamine
transporter, GCM-1, angiotensin II receptor. Validation PCR studies on
individual samples are ongoing.
Discussion: These studies have identiﬁed GC-target genes in ﬁrst trimester
placenta and provide putative candidates for mediating previously identiﬁed GC effects on cell turnover, angiogenesis, vasoconstriction and
transport. Future studies include investigation into GC target genes across
gestation and will explore any inﬂuence of fetal sex.
Keywords: Gluocorticoids, Placenta, Microarray

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.5]
COMPARATIVE EXPRESSION OF HCG IN VILLOUS TROPHOBLAST FROM
EARLY AND LATE FIRST TRIMESTER OF PREGNANCY
M Cocquebert*1,2 et al, 1Inserm, France, 2Université Paris Descartes, France,
3
AP-HP, France, 4PremUp, France
Context: The human chorionic gonadotropin hormone (hCG) is largely
produced by the syncytiotrophoblast, which represents the endocrine
tissue of the placenta that baths in maternal blood in the intervillous space.
hCG is detected in the maternal blood for the ﬁrst week of pregnancy, with
a peak level at 12 weeks of gestation (GW). During the ﬁrst trimester the
oxygen concentration in the intervillous space changes from about 1-2%
(prior to 10 GW) to approximately 6-8% (after 12 GW) due to development
of blood ﬂow to the placenta. The association of hCG release and these
early gestation events are poorly described.
Objective: To compare in situ hCG localization, expression, ex vivo secretion and levels of the major known transcription factors involved in hCG
regulation in the villous trophoblast prior to and after oxygenation of the
intervillous space in early pregnancy.
Design: First trimester chorionic villi from 8-9 and 12-13 GW were used
for: i) immunodetection of hCG in situ; ii) isolation of fresh within 2h and
primary cultures of mononucleated villous cytotrophoblasts (VCT) differentiated in syncytiotrophoblast (ST) in vitro from 24 to 72 h. Cell supernatants were collected at 24h and 72h and hCG secretion quantiﬁed using
immunoassay. Total cell extracts were prepared for Q-PCR analysis and/or
nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts prepared for immunoblotting.
Results: hCG was immunodetected in both VCT and ST at 8-9 GW and
predominatly in ST at 12-13 GW. hCG secretion was higher in 24h-VCT
cultures from 8-9 (1167 U/L  662) than from 12-13 (264 U/L  125).
During differentiation into ST, hCG increased 25 fold in primary cultures
from late placentas, whereas in cultures from the early ones only a 6-fold
increase was observed. hCG immunoblotting of the cytoplasmic fractions
conﬁrmed the secretion results. On the same immunoblots, SOD Cu/Zn, an
oxygen inducible gene was increased in the late placentas conﬁrming the
rise of oxygen in the intervillous space. Finally, we analyzed by immunoblotting the levels of AP2alpha, AP2beta, AP2gamma and Sp1, Sp3, in the
protein nuclear fractions. In the ST, AP2alpha strongly decreased in all GW
analyzed compared to VCT. For AP2beta and Sp3, the same phenomenon
was observed but the expression pattern was less pronounced. In contrast,
AP2gamma and Sp1 remained unchanged. These data suggest a possible
association of these transcription factor expression patterns with the
observed change in hCG in early pregnancy.
Keywords: hCG, trophoblast differentiation, oxygene, transfection factors

A.99

[P3.6]
LOW-DOSE ASPIRIN TREATMENT INCREASED THE EXPRESSION OF
UTERUS ENDOMETRIAL RECEPTIVELY PROTEINS, LIF OR INTEGRIN
BETA 3 IN MICE
M Zhao*3,2, Z Liu2, LM Chen2, C Chang2, Q Chen1,2, 1The University of
Auckland, New Zealand, 2Fudan Unversity, China, 3Wuxi Maternity and
Child Health Hospital, China
Introduction: Embryo implantation is the processes of developing
blastocyst adhere and embed into the receptive endometrium. Changes in
the expression of molecules on the cell surface have been seen in the
conversion of the endometrial surface from a non-receptive to a receptivity state. Cell adhesion molecules like integrins, or Leukemia inhibitory
factor (LIF) that affects cell growth and development have been identiﬁed
to play an important role during pre-implantation period. Studies have
suggested that low-dose aspirin (<100 mg/d) treatment can signiﬁcantly
improve implantation rate and ovarian responsiveness, uterine and
ovarian blood ﬂow velocity, and pregnant rates in IVF patients. However
the mechanism of low-dose aspirin treatment on increasing pregnancy
rate is unclear. Therefore the aim of this study was to investigate whether
the low-dose aspirin treatment could alter the endometrial receptively
proteins LIF or integrin beta3 expression in mice.
Methods: Female mice were treated with 0.9mg/ml aspirin daily for 15
days and then were mated with male mice. When pregnancy was
conﬁrmed, on the gestation day 4, the uterine samples were collected and
the level of integrin beta 3 and LIF were determined using immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR.
Results: Immunohistochemistry demonstrated LIF or integrin beta3
expression was substantially increased on uterine endometrium of pregnant mice that were pretreated with low dose of aspirin compared
untreated pregnancy mice. In addition, the mRNA level of LIF or integrin b3
on endometrium of pretreated pregnant mice with low dose of aspirin was
signiﬁcantly increased compared to control mice.
Discussion: These data suggested that uterine endometrial receptively
protein LIF or integrin b3 expression, which are important for embryo
implantation on uterine endometrium of pregnancy mice was increased
with low dose aspirin treatment. Increased levels of LIF or integrin beta 3
may lead to higher pregnancy rate.
Keywords: Embryo implantation, integrin beta3, Leukemia inhibitory
factor

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.100

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.7]
CHARACTERIZATION OF CULTURED MOUSE MESOMETRIAL DECIDUAL
CELLS
AK Vidsiunas*, SF Oliveira, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil
Two major subpopulations of endometrial stromal cells are present during
early implantation in the mouse and rat: the antimesometrial and mesometrial decidual cells, and the mesometrial ﬁbroblasts. Besides, other cell
types such as uterine natural killer (uNK) cells and macrophages could be
present. The aim of this study was to characterize the mouse mesometrial
decidua by immunocytochemistry and histochemistry assays in vitro.
Female Swiss mice were anesthesized and sacriﬁced on the 7.5th day of
pregnancy at 09h00. Implantation sites have been dissected, and the
embryo and anti-mesometrial and mesometrial deciduas have been
mechanically separated. Only the mesometrial decidua compartment has
been processed for cell culture. After collagenase digestion, approximately,
1-3 x 105 cells have been plated onto coverslip surface, cultured during
a 72 hour period at 37 C and CO2 5%. Then, cells have been ﬁxed in either
methanol or formalin 10% and immunocytochemistry assay for detection
of desmin (decidual cell marker), alpha-2 macroglobulin (mesometrial
decidual cell marker), factor VIII (endothelial cell marker) and F-4/80
antigen (macrophage marker), and histochemistry assay for Dolichos
biﬂorus agglutinin (DBA) lectin (uNK cell marker) have been carried out.
Cultured mesometrial decidual cells have shown positive staining for
desmin and alpha-2 macroglobulin, and negative negative staining for
factor VIII, F-4/80 antigen and DBA lectin. These preliminary data support
the potential of the cultured mesometrial stromal cells grown on glass,
which may be particularly useful in the study of mesometrial stroma
interactions among different cell types such as uterine natural killer cells,
macrophages, endothelial cells and trophoblast cells.
* grant from FAPESP 01/09019-9
Keywords: mesometrial decidual cell, cell culture, placenta, mouse

[P3.8]
AMNION REEPITHELIZES THIRD-DEGREE BURNS
A.G.T. PESSOLATO*1, D.S. MARTINS1,2, C.E AMBROSIO1,3, C.A.F.
MANCANARES1,4, A.F. CARVALHO1,4, 1Surgery Department of Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science - University of São Paulo, Brazil;,
Brazil, 2Department of Animal Science, FZEA-USP, Brazil, Brazil, 3Department of Basics Science, FZEA-USP, Brazil, Brazil, 4Department of
Morphology – UniFEOB, Sao Joao da Boa Vista - Brazil, Brazil
Because of the high statistics of burn victims in the world the experimental
production of reproducible cutaneous burns in laboratory animals is
essential for any investigation. In this study we demonstrated the potencial of the amnion in burns. Amnion is formed by a simple epithelium,
a basement membrane and an avascular mesenchyme. It present antiadhesive effects, bacteriostatic properties, wound protection, pain reduction, epithelialization effects, lack of immunogenicity and niche of stem
cell. By these features, our study tested the effectiveness of macro and
microscopic response to dermal and epidermal repair in the regenerating/
healing process of 3rd degree burn in rats treated with autologous amnion.
The burns were caused with a plate of brass (5cm2) in 19 anesthetized rats,
followed by ethical standards. The lesions were evaluated daily and at 7, 14
and 21 days the injured, tissues were processed by routine techniques for
light microscopy. Animals treated with amnion in the early days showed
initial reepithelialization microscopic, but no signs of inﬂammation
around the injured area. In 14 days stand out in borders reepithelization
and collagen ﬁbers arranged microscopically but not signs of inﬂammation
were detect. After 21 days the lesions had begun tissue repairing,
decreasing the initial size of the injury and reepithelialization of the edges
in 80% of the burn length, but with increased thickness compared to the
normal epithelium. Lesions in the control group showed only the beginning of tissue repair at 21 days, but with granulation tissue thin, dry aspect,
points of bleeding and failure of collagen to ﬁll the entire length of the
lesion. We concluded that amnion as an alternative treatment for burns
injuries from the early stages of healing may contribute to the efﬁciency
and effectiveness in the treatment of burns, and thereby contribute to
greater quality of life of burn patients.
Keywords: amnion, burns, reepithelialization, wounds

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.9]
GLYCOPROTEIN SECRETIONS FROM ENDOMETRIAL GLANDS ALTER IN
PREGNANCY WITH THE LOSS OF SPECIFIC TERMINAL SIALIC ACID
RESIDUES

Conclusion: We use multilevel approach for registration of large histology
images. This serves as the ﬁrst important step in the analysis of tissue/
blood distribution and villous tree extraction.

CJP Jones1, JD Aplin1, GJ Burton*2, 1University of Manchester, United
Kingdom, 2University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
Introduction: Histiotrophe is known to be an important feature of early
human pregnancy, providing nutrients and growth factors to the developing embryo. Our aim was to examine the glycan composition of histiotrophe from ﬁrst trimester decidua basalis and parietalis and to compare it
with secretions present in endometrial glands in the late secretory phase
of the menstrual cycle.
Methods: Twenty samples of decidua from pregnancies terminated
between 8 and 11 weeks were processed into epoxy resin and sections
stained with a panel of 22 lectins, together with six late-secretory phase
endometrial biopsies. Specimens were analysed using a semi-quantitative
ranking system and the density of lectin binding to the glandular secretions and the epithelium assessed.
Results: Histiotroph contained terminal ß-galactose, a-N-acetyl galactosamine and N-acetyl lactosamine residues bound by Arachis hypogaea
(AHA), Glycine max (soybean, SBA), Helix pomatia (HPA) and Erythrina
crystagalli (ECA) agglutinins, whereas in late secretory phase endometrial
gland secretions terminal non-reducing sialic acid was present, inhibiting
lectin binding. This suggests that, in histiotrophe, there is loss of the
capping sialic acid residues present in the non-pregnant state. No differences in glycosylation were apparent between decidua basalis and parietalis. Despite these changes, sialic acid could still be detected.
Conclusions: There is suppression of terminal sialylation in speciﬁc
oligosaccharide chains in early pregnancy, suggesting that endometrial
glycan biosynthesis is modiﬁed in response to placental signals. These
changes may facilitate absorption of histiotrophe by the trophoblast and
enhance availability of substrates for degradation
Keywords: Histiotrophe, Endometrium, Decidua, Glycosylation

[P3.10]
VILLOUS STRUCTURAL STUDY BASED ON MULTILEVEL REGISTRATION
*1

2

ĂFigure 1. Unregistered image rotation

ĂFigure 2. Registered image, rotated

1 1

P Athavale , CM Salaﬁa , L Vese , University of California at Los Angeles,
United States, 2Placental Analytics LLC, United States
Goal: In this study we analyze various characteristics of a placental tissue
using a sequence of digitized hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained
histology slides. In particular, we study variation in tissue and blood
density along a sequence of placental slices. We also extract a villous tree
structure from this image sequence.
Methods: To achieve this, registration of these images is a crucial step. This
is a large-scale problem, as the size of ‘each’ histology slide could be as
large as 500MB. We proceed with the registration sequentially i.e. we
register the (n+1)st slide to the nth slide. To this end, we use ‘multilevel
afﬁne registration’. In this approach, we scale down the images dyadically
and then input the afﬁne-transformation parameters, i.e. translation
vector, angle of rotation and scale, to the next level of registration. This
signiﬁcantly reduces computing time. Figure 1 shows an unregistered
image, which needs to be aligned, primarily through rotation. The result of
the registration is depicted in ﬁgure 2. (The result of the entire sequential
registration can be downloaded from the following URL: http://tinyurl.
com/3xxfoas.)
After registration, we use a novel image analytic algorithm to segment
tissue and blood. This technique consists in identifying the tissue and
blood based on color segmentation.
Results: In ﬁgure 3 we observe that the distribution of the tissue along the
sequence is not uniform, with more tissue density at center slices. We note
that the blood distribution, shown in ﬁgure 4, varies in a close range.
Finally, in ﬁgure 5 we show a 3D rendering of a skeletonized villous tree
that was extracted from the registered images.

A.101

ĂFigure 3. % placental tissue

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.102

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.11]
ANALYSIS OF INFLAMMATION IN REGARDS TO DISTANCE OF NEUTROPHIL MIGRATION IN HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGES: A MARKER OF INFECTION SEVERITY/DURATION?
P Athavale*1, P Getreuer1, CM Salaﬁa2,3, 1University of California at Los
Angeles, United States, 2Placental Analytics LLC, United States, 3Institute
for Basic Research, United States

ĂFigure 4. % blood (fetal or maternal)

ĂFigure 5. A 3-D rendering of a partial villous tree

Keywords: villous branching, image analysis, image registration

Background: Most pathologists currently rely on a visual examination of
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained placenta histology slide. Such qualitative examination fails to accurately determine the extent of an infection.
Moreover, merely counting the number of the inﬂammatory polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils) does not give a clear understanding of the infection. For a relatively fresh infection, we expect more
number of neutrophils near the tissue boundary. As the infection spreads,
the neutrophils move and spread into the interior. In this paper we develop
an algorithm that quantiﬁes the extent of infection and determine the
motion of the neutrophils relative to the tissue-boundary.
Methods: We studied randomly generated regions of interest (ROIs) in
histology slides and detect the neutrophils using its morphological
features. These inﬂammatory nuclei are labeled using an efﬁcient runlength implementation. The next step is to measure the minimum distance
to the boundary from each neutrophil. This distance also needs to be
a ‘perpendicular’ distance from the boundary. This is essential due to
occlusions in the ROI. To efﬁciently ﬁnd the minimum and perpendicular
distance of a neutrophil from the boundary we develop a novel algorithm,
which consists in determining a closest segment on the boundary using
only a few periodically sampled boundary points. At the same time, we
estimate the angle made by the line joining the neutrophil to this segment.
The advantage of using only the coarser sampling is that the angle estimates are smoother, since it does not see the ﬁner oscillations along the
boundary.
Results: Neutrophils, which we have previously shown to be reliably
segmented using image analysis, can be measured in terms of the distance
they have migrated from their site origin, and result expressed as histograms. From left to right, the distance histograms show increasing
numbers of neutrophils that have migrated greater distance from their
source of origin.

ĂConclusions: We anticipate such measures will correlation with amniotic
ﬂuid proteomics scores, and with infant and childhood outcomes related
to presence and severity of intraamniotic infection.
Keywords: image analysis, neutrophils, migration, acute ﬂuid infection

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.12]
STASIS-INDUCED FETAL VASCULOPATHY IN PLACENTAS FROM EXIT
PROCEDURES
J Stanek*, RM Sheridan, TM Crombleholme, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, United States
The ex-utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure is used to secure
fetal airway, cannulate for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO),
or resect a tumor s during partial delivery in a modiﬁcation of by cesarean
section. This is a retrospective study of placental pathology from EXIT
procedures.
Placental reports and glass slides from 36 placentas from EXIT pregnancies
(study group SG) and 36 placentas from pregnancies matched for gestational age from pregnancies without perinatal mortality and also delivered
by cesarean sections were blindly reviewed. Indications for EXIT procedures were: 11 cervical teratomas, 9 diaphragmatic hernias, 4 pulmonary
airway malformations, 4 micrognathias, 3 vascular malformations, 3
CHAOS, and 2 aortic stenoses. 22 clinical and 43 gross and histological
placental features were compared using the analysis of variance or Yates
Chi-square where appropriate.
The average gestational age in the SG and the CG was 34.9 weeks. Of
placental features, statistically signiﬁcant differences were found in
massive dilatation of stem veins (80 v.47%) [p¼0.007], focal segmental and/
or total cannon ball-like ﬁbrosis of isolated chorionic villi (9.77.9 vs
6.15.3 villi per placental section), as well as clusters of at least 3 avascular
chorionic villi (33 v. 5%), in the SG and the CG respectively. There were no
other statistically signiﬁcant differences in maternal and placental
parameters studied.
This is the ﬁrst, to our knowledge, analysis of placentas from EXIT procedures. The fetal thrombotic vasculopathy indicates an underlying chronic
and on-going stasis in fetal circulation due to the presence of conditions
which were indications for the EXIT procedures. The possibility of stasisrelated increased fetal blood coagulability should be considered in
management of the fetuses and neonates.
Keywords: placenta, thrombotic vasculopathy, EXIT procedure, ﬁbrosis

A.103

[P3.13]
PLACENTAL SIZE IS REDUCED AND PLACENTAL INFARCTION AND
SYNCYTIAL KNOTS ARE INCREASED IN PREGNANCIES COMPLICATED
BY DECREASED FETAL MOVEMENTS
AEP Heazell*, LK Warrander, SL Greenwood, RL Jones, CP Sibley, Maternal
and Fetal Health Research Centre, University of Manchester, United
Kingdom
Introduction: Decreased fetal movements (DFM) are associated with
increased risk of stillbirth and fetal growth restriction (FGR). DFM is
thought to represent fetal compensation to conserve energy due to
insufﬁcient oxygen and nutrient transfer resulting from placental
dysfunction. There have been no studies of placental morphology in cases
of DFM.
Objective: To investigate whether placentas from pregnancies associated
with DFM show macroscopic or microscopic evidence of altered placental
development and/or damage.
Methods: Placental samples were collected from normal pregnancies
(n¼25) and DFM (n¼18). Placentas were weighed, photographed and three
tissue samples taken using an established systematic random sampling
method. Placental dimensions and areas of infarction were measured from
photographs using image analysis software. Samples were ﬁxed, wax
embedded and stained with haematoxylin and eosin for quantiﬁcation of
syncytial knots.
Results: Even in the absence of FGR, macroscopic measurements revealed
a signiﬁcant reduction in trimmed placental weight (DFM 471.2g vs.
normal 536.4g; p<0.05) and area (DFM 214.1cm2 vs. normal 247.5cm2;
p<0.01) in DFM compared to normal pregnancies. The proportion of the
placenta showing macroscopic signs of infarction was increased in DFM
(DFM 3.5% vs. normal 0.6%; p<0.01). DFM placentas had a higher density of
syncytial knots compared to normal pregnancies (DFM 98.7 vs. normal
33.7 knots/mm2; p<0.001).
Conclusion: This study is the ﬁrst to demonstrate that DFM is associated
with abnormal placental morphology and parallels ﬁndings from placentas
in FGR. Therefore, women presenting with DFM require further investigation to identify placental insufﬁciency, including ultrasound assessment
of fetal growth and liquor volume. One novel avenue of exploration to
detect placental dysfunction is placentally-derived hormones; this is
currently underway in a pilot study of 300 women.
This study was funded by the Manchester Wellcome Trust Clinical
Research Facility
Keywords: Decreased Fetal Movements, Infarction, Placental pathology

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.104

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.14]
PLACENTAL SUPERFICIAL IMPLANTATION: FROM HISTOLOGY TO CLINICAL ASPECTS

[P3.15]
MATERNAL AND PERINATAL OUTCOMES IN WOMEN WITH SICKLE CELL
TRAIT

L Avagliano, G Bulfamante, A Morabito, E Albonico, A.M. Marconi*,
Department of Medicine, Surgery, Dentistry, University of Milano, Italy

J Cilente, J Bush, CM Salaﬁa*, New York Methodist Hospital, United States

Introduction: Human blastocyst implantation is a complex process with
many changes occurring at the anatomical, hormonal and immunological
level. Modiﬁcation of the maternal spiral arteries represents part of these
changes: loss of the muscular vascular wall, invaded by the trophoblasts
and replaced by ﬁbrinoid material, resulting in dilatation of the lumen of
the vessel represents the ﬁnal goal of the physiological vascular adaptation
during implantation. When the physiological vascular changes do not
occur a pathological placental condition deﬁned “placental superﬁcial
implantation” (PSI) may be identiﬁed at the histological examination.
The aims of our study were to evaluate the frequency of PSI in singleton
pregnancies and to examine the anatomical-clinical correlations between
the histological lesion and pregnancy outcome.
Material and methods: 1534 consecutive singleton pregnancies who
delivered at the San Paolo Hospital Medical School of Milan were retrospectively analyzed. An extensive histological and clinical investigation
was performed.
Results: PSI was present in 84 [5.5%] cases. Multivariate analysis showed
that maternal body mass index represents the major maternal pregestational factor that can inﬂuence implantation and the incidence of PSI
(Odds ratio 1.8, IC 95% 1.1-3 in cases with BMI>30 kg/m2). When
compared to cases without PSI, cases with PSI exhibited a higher incidence
of preeclampsia (10% vs 2%), placental abruption (5.5 % vs 0.3%), preterm
premature rupture of membranes (7% vs 1.3%) and intrauterine fetal death
(18% vs 2.2%) (p<0,001).
Conclusion: Placental superﬁcial implantation is associated with signiﬁcant adverse pregnancy outcome. The inﬂuence on the woman lifestyle
with a search of pregnancy when the ideal body weight is obtained might
reduce its incidence.
Keywords: placenta, implantation, pregnancy outcome, spiral artery

Introduction: The effect of sickle cell trait (SCT) if any on pregnancy is
debated. SCT is relatively prevalent among African Americans (carrier
frequency 8-12%). The objective of this study is to evaluate the maternal
and perinatal outcomes with SCT compared to controls.
Methods: 96 Black pregnant women delivering a fetus > 16 weeks at NY
Methodist Hospital from 12/2007-12/2009 were identiﬁed by ICD 9th
edition code for “sickle cell trait”. The next delivery of a African/Caribbean
American pregnant with a normal hemoglobin electrophoresis composed
the controls (N¼96). Outcome measure included birth weight,
preeclampsia, preterm birth, delivery mode, APGAR scores, cord pH,
placental weight, signs of placental malperfusion and NICU admission.
Groups were compared using the ANOVA test and Mann-Whitney test for
non-normally distributed variables.
Results: Infants born to women with SCT had lower birth weights (3180 +
501 g v. 3362 + 408 g, p¼0.043), lower placental weights (460+116 g v. 495
+82 g, p<0.038), and a trend to higher fetoplacental weight ratios (7.2¼1.8
v. 6.8+1.6, p¼0.10). After adjustment for semiquantitative scores of uteroplacental vascular histopathology lesions, the association of reduced
birth and placental weights with SCT was abolished. Of secondary
outcomes, SCT mothers had increased rates of preeclampsia (p¼ 0.007),
NICU admissions/transfers (p¼0.001), and fetal nucleated red blood cells
(p < 0.001) No association was found between SCT and preterm birth
(p¼ 0.093).
Conclusions: SCT mothers delivered infants with signiﬁcantly lower birth
and placental weights (that appears to be due to excess placental histopathology related to maternal uteroplacental malperfusion), had increased
rates of preeclampsia, and increased NICU admission. The decreased
placental weight and malperfusion ﬁndings may provide explain the
mechanism of poor perinatal outcome.
Keywords: sickle cell trait, placental pathology, birth weight, placental
weight

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.16]
PLACENTAL VASCULAR INDICES OBTAINED BY A SINGLE CENTRAL
SONOBIOPSY CORRELATE WELL WITH THOSE FROM EVALUATION OF
THE ENTIRE PLACENTA
Methodius Tuuli*, Jean Schoenborn, Anthony Odibo, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, United States
Introduction: Abnormal placentation is associated with several complications of pregnancy. Advances in 3D ultrasound/power Doppler permit
quantitative non-invasive assessment of placental vascularization.
Vascular indices are generally obtained from evaluation of the entire
placenta, a procedure only possible early in pregnancy. Sonobiopsy has
been proposed as an alternative when utilization of the entire placenta is
not feasible.
Objective: We tested the hypothesis that placental vascular indices
obtained from a single central sonobiopsy correlate with those from
evaluation of the entire placenta.
Methods: Three-dimensional power Doppler ultrasound examinations
were performed in 90 singleton pregnancies at 11-14 weeks’ gestation. The
VOCALÔ (Virtual Organ Computer-aided Analysis) program was used with
30 degree rotation angles (six planes) to calculate vascularization index
(VI), ﬂow index (FI) and vascularization ﬂow index (VFI). The same indices
were calculated from a single spherical central sonobiopsy taken from the
middle of the image, extending from the basal to the chorionic plates. The
two sets of indices were compared for their degree of correlation and
agreement.
Results: The mean gestational age was 12.1  0.6 weeks’. The mean of each
of the placental vascular indices obtained from placental sonobiopsy and
whole placenta evaluation were not signiﬁcantly different (14.6 vs. 13.9,
p¼0.56 for VI; 46.3 vs. 44.9, p¼0.53 for FI; 6.6 vs. 6.1, p¼0.51 for VFI,
respectively). The indices obtained from the two techniques were also
signiﬁcantly correlated (Pearson's r¼ 0.52 for VI; r¼0.50 for VI; r¼0.50 for
VFI, all p<0.0001).
Discussion: Placental vascular indices obtained from sonobiopsy correlate
with those from evaluation of the entire placenta. Sonobiopsy may be
a valid alternative for evaluation of the placental vascular tree when
visualization of the entire placenta is not feasible.

A.105

[P3.17]
ABNORMAL MATERNAL IMMUNE ACTIVATION LEADS TO COAGULOPATHY IN A RAT MODEL OF SPONTANEOUS ABORTION
B. Falcón*, S. Macdonald-Goodfellow, M. Othman, C. Graham, Queen's
University, Canada
Introduction: Spontaneous abortion is often associated with an aberrant
maternal immune activation and systemic maternal coagulopathies. We
have previously shown that activation of the maternal immune system, via
administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 100 mg/kg), leads to spontaneous abortion in rats through a TNFa-dependent mechanism. We
hypothesize that inﬂammation-induced pregnancy complications are
causally linked to maternal coagulopathies.
Methods: Using the LPS model of spontaneous abortion, we characterized
the maternal coagulation status in rats (n¼5) at 1hr post LPS treatment
using thromboelastograpy (TEG), a global haemostatic assay that measures
the kinetics of clot formation. To determine a causal link between activation of a maternal inﬂammatory response and coagulopathies, we assessed
the maternal coagulation status following administration of the TNFa
inhibitor EnbrelÒ.
Results: Maternal coagulopathy was evident 1 hr following LPS administration. Two of the ﬁve rats tested exhibited stage II disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), characterised by excessive ﬁbrinolysis, reduced
clot strength, reduced rate of clot formation, and low clotting index as
compared to saline controls. The remaining three rats exhibited hypercoagulability alone, showing a reduced clotting time, poor ﬁbrinolysis, and
enhanced rate of clot formation as compared to saline controls. Administration of EnbrelÒ to LPS-treated rats improved the DIC condition in two of
the three rats tested as evidenced by reduced ﬁbrinolysis, regained clot
strength, increased rate of clot formation, and increased clotting index as
compared with LPS-treated rats.
Conclusion: Modulation of maternal immune activation may be useful in
the prevention of coagulopathies associated with complications of
pregnancy.
Keywords: Coagulopathy, Spontaneous Abortion, Inﬂammation

Figure 1: Comparison of placental vascular indices from whole placenta
evaluation and sonobiopsy (N¼90)

Ă*Logarithmic transformation required to achieve normal distribution

Keywords: Three-dimensional power Doppler, Placental vascular indices,
Sonobiopsy, Correlation

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.106

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.18]
PLACENTAL FORMATION, CHILDBIRTH, AND FIBROID TREATMENT: AN
INTEGRATION AND REVIEW OF THE CIRCULATION OF THE PLACENTA
AND THE UTERUS DURING A WOMAN'S LIFE-CYCLE.(1)
F Burbank*, Salt Creek International Women's Health Foundation, United
States
During pregnancy, mother's blood prepares for an enormous hemostatic
event that is 9 months away: the delivery of the placenta - the fetal organ
that is the vascular link between mother and child. At childbirth, 1/10th of
mother's cardiac output ﬂows through the placenta. When the placenta is
sheared from the uterus, 200 large, uteroplacental arteries are ripped apart
and bleed profusely into the uterine cavity. For hours following delivery,
uterine contractions slow blood ﬂow within the uterus, which then allows
the high concentration of clotting factors in mother's blood to solidify
throughout the uterus and stop blood loss. Hours later, the tide reverses
and most of these blood clots dissolve and blood ﬂow returns to the uterus.
For many hours following delivery, the uterus is ischemic and hypoxic.
Unlike brain and heart, which can only survive minutes of decreased blood
ﬂow, the uterus can withstand dramatically diminished blood ﬂow for
hours. In fact, not only can the uterus tolerate low blood ﬂow, it is evolutionally programmed to experience very low blood ﬂow every few years.
Uterine ischemia and hypoxia are a natural part of every woman's genetic
past and are necessary for uterine health.
In 1995 a group of French physicians discovered that it was possible to
emulate the vascular physiology of childbirth by stopping blood ﬂow to the
uterus with small, plastic particles. Initially, they injected these particles to
diminish blood loss during myomectomy. However, they soon learned that
the injection of these particles was therapeutic in-and-of-itself for women
with symptomatic ﬁbroids.
Unbeknownst to this French group, earlier, in 1964, an American physician
surgically occluded the uterine arteries to treat women without ﬁbroids
who had excessive monthly menstrual blood loss. Subsequent physicians
have occluded the uterine arteries in various ways to treat a third common
disorder, adenomyosis. Finally, these clinical successes suggest that future
episodes of endometriosis may be preventable in some women treated
with uterine artery closure.
The biological basis of these treatments rests on an understanding of the
circulation of the placenta and uterus immediately following childbirth.
(1)Burbank F. Fibroids, menstruation, childbirth, and evolution: The
fascinating story of uterine blood vessels. Tucson, AZ: Wheatmark; 2009;
ISBN: 978-1-60494-170-8.
Keywords: uteroplacental arteries, hemostasis, ﬁbroids, evolution

[P3.19]
NFB-DEPENDENT INCREASE OF KYNURENINE PATHWAY ACTIVITY IN
HUMAN PLACENTA: INHIBITION BY SULFASALAZINE
P Dharane1, U Manuelpillai1, E Wallace1,2, D Walker*1,2, 1Monash Institute
of Medical Research, Australia, 2Ritchie Centre for Baby Health Research,
Australia
Introduction: In the human placenta the kynurenine pathway of tryptophan metabolism is up-regulated by infection, releasing pro-inﬂammatory
and neuroactive metabolites into the fetal circulation. In this study we
used the NF-lB inhibitor sulfasalazine (SZS) to determine if activation of
NF-lB is involved in the inﬂammation-induced increase of kynurenine
pathway activity.
Methods: Placentas (n¼8) were obtained after elective caesarian section at
37-40 weeks gestation and explants (35-40 mg) were prepared from
terminal villi and incubated for 24 or 48 h in the presence of 10mg/ml LPS;
duplicates of each explant were incubated with or without 5 mM SZS
added to the medium. mRNA expression of the kynurenine-forming
enzymes indoleamine 2,3-dioxygrenase (IDO) and tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO), and the inﬂammatory cytokines TNFa and IL-6 were
measured by RT-PCR. NF-kB activity was measured in nuclear protein
using a colorimetric sandwich ELISA. Kynurenine production from tryptophan was measured in the incubation medium by HPLC.
Results: mRNA expression of IDO, TDO, TNFa and IL-6 mRNAs were all
signiﬁcantly increased by the LPS treatment (P<0.05), a response signiﬁcantly decreased by the presence of SZS (P<0.05 vs no SZS). Kynurenine
released into the culture medium increased with LPS treatment but this
was also prevented by SZS. Under control conditions of incubation (i.e.,
without LPS), SZS signiﬁcantly decreased NF-kB activity (P<0.001), and
while LPS treatment signiﬁcantly increased NF-kB activity(P<0.001), this
was totally prevented by SZS.
Discussion: SZS inhibited both kynurenine and proinﬂammatory cytokine
production induced by LPS in the placenta. Direct measurement of NFl-B
activity showed that SZS decreased NFl-B activation under both control
and LPS-treated conditions. These observations show that kynurenine
pathway activity in the human placenta is increased by a NFl-B dependent
pathway, and suggests a new therapeutic strategy for the management of
pregnancies with in utero infection.
Keywords: Infection, Kynurenine, Cytokines, Sulfasalazine

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.107

[P3.20]
IS AN ELEVATED LEVEL OF INTERLEUKIN-1BETA IN POSTPARTUM
MATERNAL PLASMA ASSOCIATED WITH POSTPARTUM MOOD
DISORDERS?

[P3.21]
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN VITAMIN D RELATED GENES AND MATERNAL
CIRCULATING 25OH VITAMIN D3 IN PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS IN AN
AUSTRALIAN POPULATION

S.R. Srinivas, Jodi Hudgins, D. Sutherland, V. Ganapathy, S.C. Mobley, P.D.
Prasad* et al, Medical College of Georgia, United States

CT Roberts*1, SD Thompson1, DF Furness1, SY Lee1, PH Anderson2, H Morris2
et al, 1University of Adelaide, Australia, 2Hanson Institute, Australia

Figure 1. Placenta-brain axis as a link to postpartum mood disorder

Background: Postpartum mood disorders (PMD) are mood disturbances
that are experienced by majority of mothers after childbirth. The
biochemical etiology of PMD is still largely unclear. The leading biologic
theory for the cause of nonpuerperal depression lies in the deregulation of
monoaminergic neurotransmission, especially the serotonergic neurotransmission. Studies done in our lab have shown the existence of an
efﬁcient mechanism involving a placenta-uterine cross talk for clearing the
serotonin (5HT) from the placental intervillous space as shown in Fig. 1. IL1b and serotonin transporter (SERT) are the primary players in this
placenta-uterine cross talk. We hypothesize that a disruption of this cross
talk at parturition, as detailed in Fig. 1, will trigger an increase in circulating
IL-1b levels in postpartum maternal plasma, which in turn will precipitate
PMD. The objective of the present study is to monitor the circulating levels
of IL-1b in maternal plasma at various times during the peripartum period.
Study design: Pregnant women who had no complications such as
gestational diabetes, preeclampsia, major psychiatric disorders, and
history of recreational drug use were recruited. In addition, all women
with a history of any infection within one month of blood draw were
excluded from the study. Blood was collected in the third trimester before
delivery and at 1, 2, 4, and 8 weeks after delivery. IL-1b levels were
measured in the plasma using a commercially available ELISA kit.
Results: Preliminary studies from an ongoing study are presented here.
Plasma sample collected from 104 women were included in the analysis.
Also, not all women provided all the ﬁve blood samples. The results
obtained are shown in Table 1.

Prenatal (n=83)
Week 1 (n=51)
Week 2 (n=72)
Week 4 (n=70)
Week 8 (n=67)

Introduction: Preeclampsia is associated with vitamin D deﬁciency at
diagnosis. We aimed to determine if pregnancy complications are related
to maternal serum 25 hydroxy vitamin D3 (25OHD3) at 15 weeks gestation
and with single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the vitamin D
receptor (VDR) and CYP24A1 (Vitamin D metabolising enzyme) genes in
the Adelaide SCOPE cohort.
Methods: 1169 nulliparous couples were recruited prospectively from
2005-2008. Peripheral blood from couples and cord blood from babies
were collected. Genotyping was performed using Sequenom MassARRAY.
Serum 25OHD3 was measured using the Roche Elecsys Immunoassay. Data
for 991 Caucasian couples were analysed. Genotypes, vitamin D concentrations at 15 weeks gestation and other risk factors for preeclampsia (PE
n¼71), gestational hypertension (GHT n¼92), preterm birth (PTB n¼69),
small for gestational age (SGA n¼94), gestational diabetes (GDM n¼38)
were compared with normal controls (n¼450) and analysed using Logistic
regression and Chi Square.
Results: Serum 25OHD3 at 15 weeks gestation was <60nmol/L (level of
25OHD3 sufﬁciency) in 35% of women and <80nmol/L (proposed level of
sufﬁciency) in 75% of women. It was higher in smokers and inversely
correlated with BMI (r¼-0.177, p<0.0005) and maternal blood pressures
(r¼-0.135, p<0.0005). When adjusted for BMI and month of sampling,
serum 25OHD3 was signiﬁcantly higher in women destined to develop PE
but lower in women who later developed GDM (both p<0.05). Maternal
VDR rs7975232 associates with PE (p<0.023) and GDM (p<0.016), while
maternal CYP24A1 rs2248137 associates with GHT (p<0.039). Maternal
and baby VDR and CYP24A1 SNPs signiﬁcantly affect circulating 25 OHD3
in the mother at 15 weeks gestation.
Conclusion: In Adelaide circulating 25OHD3 at 15 weeks gestation is
associated with pregnancy complications. SNPs in vitamin D related genes
interact with these and BMI in adverse pregnancy outcomes. Ongoing
research will explore the vitamin D pathway in early placental function
and pregnancy outcome.
Keywords: Vitamin D, preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, genetic
polymorphisms

IL-1b (pg/ml plasma)  SEM
0.194  0.028
0.164  0.026
0.183  0.028
0.149  0.018
0.180  0.033

Conclusions: We report for the ﬁrst time maternal IL-1b levels measured
before and at various time points after delivery. Results indicate that there
is no signiﬁcant change in maternal IL-1b values following parturition.
However, these results are preliminary with relatively few subject
numbers. In addition, analyses of changes in IL-1b values within the same
subject also need to be performed before a role for IL-1b in the etiology of
postpartum depression can be completely ruled out. (Supported by HRSA
grant R40 MC 08967)
Keywords: Postpartum Mood Disorder, postpartum depression, serotonin
transporter, interleukin-1beta

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.108

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.22]
CAN STEROIDS INDUCE ENDOGENOUS ANALGESIA DURING LABOR?
Antonin Parizek*, Martin Hill, Michaela Klimkova et al, 1Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology of the First Faculty of Medicine and General
Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, Czech Republic
Steroid hormones can cross the blood-brain-barrier and induce changes in
emotions and behavior at the genome level. These affects, the result of
classic steroid hormone function mechanisms, operate relatively slowly
over minutes up to an hour (McEwen BS, 1991). Some steroids, however,
can rapidly inﬂuence neuron excitability, on the order of seconds or even
milliseconds. These compounds are known as “neuroactive steroids”
(NAS). NASs modulate the function of ion channels, in particular GABAA
and NMDA receptors.
Rapidly acting steroids have been known since the 1940s. At that time, we
became aware of the anesthetic inﬂuence of steroid hormones (Selye H,
1941), which led to the subsequent development of the steroid anesthetics
alphaxalone and pregnanolone (AlthesinÒ, SaffanÒ, EltanolonÒ). NASs,
especially allopregnanolone and pregnanolone, thus have signiﬁcant
anesthetic effects. In addition, they act as notable anxiolytics, analgetics,
and compounds inﬂuencing memory (Beekman M, 1998).
NASs are synthesized in the nervous tissues from cholesterol. Such NASs
made in nervous tissues are called neurosteroids. NASs are also formed
from steroid precursors originating in periphery. During pregnancy, this
peripheral NAS production is dominant, particularly from the placenta and
fetal liver. The production of NAS greatly increases during pregnancy,
reaching up to 100-times higher level around parturition than out of
pregnancy Gilbert-Evans SE, 2005). Even though precursors of NASs are
largely of fetal origin, the levels of GABAergic NASs are signiﬁcantly higher
in the mother than in the fetus. The ratios of NAS/inactive oxidized
precursors are about 2.5 and 5-times higher for allopregnanonolone and
pregnanolone, respectively (Fig. 1). In light of the well-known neurophysiologic effects of NASs, the question arises whether there is an increased
threshold for pain, or alternatively if in addition to the endogenous opioid
system there is a second pathway of endogenous analgesia before birth.

[P3.23]
INTERLEUKIN-1 RECEPTOR ANTAGONIST IN CORD BLOOD FROM
PRETERM NEONATES
NA Hodyl, MJ Stark, A Osei-Kumah, P Nath, VL Clifton*, Robinson Instistute,
University of Adelaide, Australia
Introduction: Increased concentrations of cord blood pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines are associated with a number of adverse conditions in preterm
infants, including growth inhibition, chronic lung disease and cerebral
damage. The actions of these cytokines are, in part, self regulated through
the release of opposing cytokines as well as cytokine antagonists. While
decreased levels of the endogenously released interleukin-1 receptor
antagonist (IL-1ra) in preterm cord blood have previously been associated
with adverse outcomes in preterm neonates, these studies failed to assess
simultaneously the balance between IL-1receptor agonists and antagonists. The aim of this study was to characterise cord blood IL-1a, IL-1b and
IL-1ra concentrations together in cord blood collected from term (37-41
weeks), preterm (32-36 weeks) and very preterm (24-31 weeks) neonates.
Methods: Plasma was separated from cord venous blood from 12 term, 20
preterm and 8 very preterm infants. Concentrations of IL-1a, IL-1b and
IL-1ra, were determined by Luminex multiplex system.
Results: IL-1ra was detectable in 75% of term and 78% of preterm infants.
IL-1a and IL-1b were detectable in 25% of term infants, and 14% of preterm
infants. Cord blood concentrations of IL-1ra decreased across gestation,
with signiﬁcantly higher levels observed in very preterm compared to
preterm, and preterm compared to term infants (p< 0.05 in both
instances). IL-1ra concentrations were signiﬁcantly correlated with IL-1b
levels in preterm (r¼0.422, p¼0.05) but not term cord blood. IL-1a and
IL-1b concentrations were not signiﬁcantly different in preterm compared
to term, but were signiﬁcantly correlated with each other (r¼0.554,
p¼0.001). No sex speciﬁc differences in these cytokines were observed.
Discussion: Given that IL-1ra functions to regulate the agonist effects of
IL-1a and -b in normal biologic processes, the signiﬁcant correlation
between IL-1ra and IL-1b in preterm cord blood suggests an attempt
towards self-regulation in preterm parturition. The gestation speciﬁc
decrease in cord blood IL-1ra levels suggests a greater role for this protein
in protecting against inﬂammation in early development and in preterm
compared to term infants.
Keywords: Preterm infant, cord blood, cytokine, IL-1 receptor antagonist

ĂFigure 1. Proﬁles of the ratios of steroids in reduced forms to the corresponding
oxidized forms in the plasma from the umbilical artery (UA), umbilical vein (UV) and
maternal cubital vein (MV) and in amniotic ﬂuid (AF) in preterm and normal labor.
The symbols with error bars represent re-transformed means with their 95%
conﬁdence intervals for individual body ﬂuids (full circles¼UA, full squares¼UV,
empty squares¼MV, empty triangle¼UA. The 95% conﬁdence intervals are
computed using the least signiﬁcant difference multiple comparisons (p<0.05). The
conﬁdence intervals, which do not overlap each other, denote signiﬁcant difference
between the respective subgroup means. The horizontal line from the full circles
represents the mean level of the steroid in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle.

Keywords: neurosteroids, placenta, endogenous analgesia, labor

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.24]
ALLERGEN INDUCED CYTOKINE RELEASE IN HUMAN PLACENTAE AND
IT'S POSSIBLE ROLE IN FETAL PROGRAMMING OF ALLERGIES
U Enke*, J Heinzelmann, F Varosi, E Schleußner, UR Markert, L Seyfarth,
Placenta Labor, Germany
Introduction: Previous animal experiments indicated the transmissibility
of general allergic diathesis from the mother to the fetus. All major cell
types known to be involved in allergic processes, including dendritic cells,
T cells, B cells and mast cells are present in the decidua. Thus, allergen
induced mediator release may prime the fetus for easier sensitization in
later life. To investigate possible differences in cytokine production from
placental tissue of atopic and healthy mothers after contact with a relevant
allergen, we developed a one sided open placenta perfusion model with an
internal standard to perfuse two separate cotyledons from the same
placenta simultaneously with and without addition of relevant allergens
Methods: Pregnant mothers were asked for allergic symptoms or known
allergy against birch pollen or apple. Reported allergy was conﬁrmed by
CAP/RAST-Test. In placentae, obtained directly after birth, two cotyledons
were chosen for open perfusion. Cotyledon “A” was perfused with normal
medium for 1 hour followed by a 5 hour perfusion with apple allergencontaining medium (mal d 1). Cotyledon “B” resembles the internal control
and was only perfused by allergen-free medium for 6 hours. Outﬂow
samples were collected and analyzed for immune mediator release.
Histamine concentration was determined spectrophoto-ﬂuorometrically
after extraction and derivatization with o-phthalaldehyde. The cytokines
IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma were analyzed by using
a cytometric multiplex bead array.
Results: After application of apple allergen in perfusion medium, a significant time-dependent release of TNF-alpha and IL-6 was detectable in
placentae of mothers suffering apple allergy compared to those from
healthy mothers. The expression of the other interleukins and histamine
was not remarkably altered.
Discussion: Allergens can induce allergy related effects, which may
disturb the immunological balance at the feto-maternal interface and
might prime the developing fetal immune system for facilitated later
susceptibility for allergic sensitizations.
Keywords: placenta, perfusion, allergy, cytokine

A.109

[P3.25]
CORRELATION BETWEEN PLACENTAL ABNORMALITIES AND SIGNS OF
FETAL INTRAUTERINE GROWTH RESTRICTION IN CASES SUBMITTED
TO TRANSCUTANEOUS ELECTRICAL NERVE STIMULATION
CSO Guimarães*1, BBF Gomes1, GC Guimarães2, ECC Castro1, RRM Corrêa1
et al, 1Triângulo Mineiro Federal University, Brazil, 2Lavras Federal
University, Brazil
Introduction: In humans, studies demonstrated that the Transcutaneous
Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS) can be used for therapeutic purpose in
cases with placental insufﬁciency. The current literature, however, do not
provide comprehensive data regarding the inﬂuence of placental vascular
abnormalities on fetal internal organs in cases submitted to TENS.
Objective: To evaluate placental vascularization and intrauterine growth
restriction induced in an experimental model, by morphometric analysis
of the internal organs, demonstrating or not the viability of the use of TENS
during pregnancy.
Methods: To induce uteroplacental insufﬁciency and intrauterine growth
restriction in Wistar rats, the right uterine artery was ligated on the 15th
day of gestation. TENS was applied from the immediate postoperative
period until euthanasia. To analyze placental vessels, factor VIII was
identiﬁed by immunohistochemistry. There was performed the morphometric analysis of the placental vessels and common fetal organs related to
intrauterine restriction, as brain, lung and liver. Results: the caliber of
placental vessels was smaller in cases stimulated (p¼0.02), with the
ligation (p¼0.001) and in interaction of stimulus and ligation (p<0.001).
The number of vessels was smaller in cases with ligation (p<0.001). In
cases stimulated, the measures of brain were smaller (p¼0.045), and liver
measures tended to decrease (p¼0.085). There was a negative correlation
between the caliber of placental vessels and measures of the brain
(r¼-0.488, p¼0.0533), and negative and signiﬁcant correlation between
the caliber of these vessels and measures of lung (r¼-0.538, p¼0.307).
Discussion and Conclusion: Our data indicated a decrease in the caliber of
placental vessels associated with TENS, contradicting the hypothesis of
vasodilatation associated with this current, and also, reduction of
measures of fetal internal organs typically affected by intrauterine growth
restriction, suggesting caution about its use during pregnancy.
Keywords: intrauterine restriction, morphometry, placenta, Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.110

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.26]
THE EXPRESSION OF SYNDECAN PROTEOGLYCANS IN FETAL GROWTH
RESTRICTION

[P3.27]
HYPERHOMOCYSTEINEMIA MOUSE AS AN ANIMAL MODEL FOR
PRE-TERM BIRTH

A Chui*1, P Murthi1, SP Brennecke1, V Ignjatovic2, P Monagle2, JM Said2 et al,
1
Department of Perinatal Medicine, Pregnancy Research Centre, The Royal
Women's Hospital and Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville 3052, Victoria, Australia, 2Murdoch
Children's Research Institute and Department of Clinical Haematology and
Department of Paediatrics, The Royal Children's Hospital and The University of Melbourne, Parkville 3052, Victoria, Australia

V. Ganapathy*, S.R. Sonne, S.B. Smith, A.M. Murphy, P.D. Prasad, Medical
College of Georgia, United States

Fetal growth restriction (FGR) is a leading cause of perinatal morbidity and
mortality. FGR pregnancies are associated with abnormal umbilical artery
Doppler velocimetry and histological evidence of placental thrombosis.
Heparan sulphate proteoglycans (HSPGs) are highly expressed in the
placenta and contain heparan sulphate side chains which interact with
antithrombin. This interaction may prevent thrombosis within the
placental circulation. We hypothesised that altered expression of the
HSPGs, syndecans 1-4, may result in dysregulation of coagulation within
the placenta, and therefore contribute to the development of FGR.
The aim of this study was to determine the expression of syndecans 1-4 in
FGR-affected placentae compared with gestation-matched controls. RNA
obtained from 28 FGR and 28 control placentae were reverse transcribed
into cDNA. Real-time PCR was used to determine the mRNA expression of
syndecans 1-4, relative to the housekeeping gene, GAPDH, according to the
2-DDCT method [1]. Western immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry
was performed to determine the protein expression and cellular localisation of syndecans 1-4, respectively. Data are represented as meanSEM
with statistical analysis by the Student's t-test.
The table shows the relative mean mRNA expression of syndecans 1-4 in
FGR-affected placentae compared with gestation-matched controls.
Mean mRNA expression (mean±SEM)
Syndecan
Syndecan
Syndecan
Syndecan
Syndecan

1
2
3
4

Control

FGR

P Value

1.470.17
1.040.09
0.960.1
1.180.1

0.910.14
0.540.1
0.780.08
0.880.1

0.02
0.0009
0.19
0.06

Western immunoblotting supported these ﬁndings and immunohistochemistry conﬁrmed that all syndecans were located in close proximity to
either fetal or maternal blood (i.e.: localised to fetal vascular endothelial
cells or syncytiotrophoblast).
These data demonstrate reduced expression of syndecans 1 and 2 in
FGR-affected placentae compared with controls. However, the expression
of syndecans 3 and 4 is not different between the two groups. This suggests
that even though the syndecans belong to the same family, the role of each
syndecan may be different. Altered expression of syndecan may contribute
to the pathogenesis of FGR. Understanding the precise mechanism by
which this occurs may lead to future therapies for this disorder.
1. Livak, K.J. and T.D. Schmittgen, Analysis of relative gene expression data
using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method.
Methods, 2001. 25(4): p. 402-8.
Keywords: Syndecan, Proteoglycan, Fetal growth restriction, placenta

Introduction: Folic acid deﬁciency increases the risk for neural tube
defects in fetuses. Recent studies indicate that folic acid deﬁciency may
also increase the risk for pre-term birth. Hyperhomocysteinemia is
a consequence of folic acid deﬁciency. Therefore, hyperhomocysteinemia
may be a pathogenic factor in pre-term birth.
Methods: Cystathionine-beta-synthase knockout mouse was used as
a model of hyperhomocysteinemia. Homozygous mice do not survive
beyond 3 weeks of age. Heterozygous mice survive and are fertile.
Heterozygous females were mated with heterozygous males, the day of
conception noted, and the number of days for delivery recorded. Wildtype
females mated with wildtype males served as controls. Gene expression in
wildtype and homozygous placentas was studied by microarray. The
effects of oxytocin and homocysteine on myometrial contraction were
investigated using uterine tissues from wildtype and heterozygous
pregnant mice.
Results: The gestational period in wildtype females was 19.5 +/- 0.07 days.
In contrast, the gestational period in heterozygous females was 16.6 +/0.13 (p < 0.001). Plasma levels of homocysteine in heterozygous mice were
4-fold higher than in wildtype controls. Homozygous fetuses/placentas
weighed signiﬁcantly less than wildtype and heterozygous fetuses/
placentas (p < 0.01). Several genes were expressed differentially in
placenta as a consequence of hyperhomocysteinemia. One of the genes
upregulated markedly in hyperhomocysteinemic placenta was cyclooxygenase 2. The upregulation was evident also in uterine tissue. The
expression of the proteins responsible for placental transfer of folic acid
was not altered in hyperhomocysteinemic mouse placentas. Homocysteine
did not affect uterine contraction caused by oxytocin in wildtype mice. In
contrast, homocysteine itself caused uterine contraction and also potentiated oxytocin-induced contraction in uterine tissues from hyperhomocysteinemic pregnant mice.
Discussion: We conclude that elevation of circulating levels of homocysteine causes pre-term birth in mice. Therapeutic strategies to reduce
homocysteine levels may be effective to prevent pre-term birth in humans.
Keywords: pre-term birth, folic acid deﬁciency, Hyperhomocysteinemia,
Cyclooxygenase 2

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.111

[P3.28]
CHARACTERISATION OF FETAL MEMBRANE AND DECIDUAL LEUKOCYTE
SUBPOPULATIONS DURING TERM AND PRETERM LABOUR

[P3.29]
PORCINE REPRODUCTIVE AND RESPIRATORY SYNDROME
(PRRSV) REPLICATION IN FETAL IMPLANTATION SITES

Y Omoomian, SA Hamilton, RL Jones*, University of Manchester, United
Kingdom

U.U. Karniychuk*, D. Saha, M. Geldhof, M. Vanhee, P. Cornillie, H.J.
Nauwynck, Ghent University, Belgium

Introduction: There is considerable evidence for inﬂammatory processes
during normal labour at term, with leukocyte inﬁltration of the cervix and
myometrium1. However, there are conﬂicting data regarding inﬂammatory events in the fetal membranes and decidua1,2. The decidua is a major
immunological tissue in early pregnancy and is ideally placed to coordinate inﬂammatory events during parturition. We hypothesized that
leukocyte inﬁltration of the amniochorion and decidua occurs with
preterm and term labour.
Methods: Women were recruited into 4 study groups: term labour (TL),
term not in labour (TNIL), preterm labour (PTL) and PTL with infection
(PTLi) (n¼8-10/group). Fetal membranes were sampled at delivery.
Immunohistochemistry was performed for leukocyte common antigen
(CD45), macrophages (CD68), neutrophils (n-elastase) and uNK cells
(CD56). Leukocyte densities were quantiﬁed using image analysis.
Results: Leukocytes were more abundant in decidua (10-fold higher) than
amnion and chorion. There were no differences in overall CD45+ leukocyte
numbers between study groups. However signiﬁcantly greater numbers of
macrophages were present in decidua in TL and PTL compared to TNIL
(56.5 and 43.0 vs. 21.0/mm2; p<0.05). Neutrophil inﬁltration was negligible in TL and PTL, but signiﬁcantly elevated in PTLi (4.9 and 7.1 vs. 345.1/
mm2; p<0.05). Decidual uNKs were signiﬁcantly greater in PTL (76.1/
mm2) compared to other groups (0-5/mm2; p<0.05).
Discussion: This study conﬁrms that decidual macrophage inﬁltration
increases in PTL and TL. This is consistent with our data from animal
models3 and suggests a role for macrophage-derived mediators in the
labour process. Higher numbers of uNK cells in PTL may reﬂect the earlier
gestation. These data identify the decidua as a major player in inﬂammatory events during labour at preterm and term labour.
1
Osman et al (2003) Mol Hum Reprod 9, 41-45; 2Keski-Nisula et al (2000)
Hum Pathol 31, 841-846; 3Hamilton et al (2010) Reprod Sci, 178A.
Keywords: Leukocytes, Decidua, Labour, Fetal Membranes

PRRSV is considered to be the most important viral pathogen in swine
production worldwide. Reproductive failure due to PRRSV is characterized
by an increase in late-term abortions, early farrowing, number of dead and
mummiﬁed fetuses and weak-born piglets. Sialoadhesin (Sn) and CD163
are markers for PRRSV susceptibility of macrophages [1]. It has been
postulated that induction of apoptosis in human fetal membranes facilitates reproductive failure [2, 3]. Because Sn+ and CD163+ cells are present
in endometrium/placentas from healthy sows [4] and PRRSV-infected lung
macrophages die by apoptosis [5], we hypothesized that PRRSV can
replicate and induce apoptosis in endometrial/placental macrophages. The
objective of the present study was to localize and quantify PRRSV-positive
and apoptotic (TUNEL+) cells in endometrium/placentas. Three sows were
inoculated with PRRSV at 90 days of gestation, euthanized at 10 days postinoculation and sampled (uterus with placenta corresponding to every
fetus; fetal sera; organs). Non-inoculated sows served as controls. Transplacental PRRSV spread was detected in all inoculated sows. Histopathological changes were not found in endometrium/placentas from inoculated
and healthy sows. Only one PRRSV-positive fetus was found dead and
degeneration of the fetal placental mesenchyme was observed. Using
immunoﬂuorescence staining, single PRRSV-positive cells were found in
the maternal stroma corresponding to all fetuses. In the fetal placental
mesenchyme corresponding to PRRSV-positive fetuses, the infected cells
were abundant and spread focally. Double staining showed that 100% of
the PRRSV-positive cells in the fetal placental mesenchyme were Sn+ and
CD163+ (Fig. 1). The amount of TUNEL+ cells was signiﬁcantly increased in
PRRSV-positive endometrium/placentas (Fig. 2). A spatial correlation
between the sites of PRRSV replication and TUNEL+ cells was observed
(Fig. 3). Double labeling revealed that 9 to 57% of the apoptotic cells in
fetal placentas were PRRSV-positive. In conclusion, PRRSV efﬁciently
replicates in endometrium/placentas and causes apoptosis in infected and
surrounding cells.
1. H. Van Gorp, W. Van Breedam, P.L. Delputte, H.J. Nauwynck, Sialoadhesin
and CD163 join forces during entry of the porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome virus, J Gen Virol (2008), pp. 2943–2953.
2. H.M. Tanir, T. Sener, S. Artan, B. Kaytaz, F. Sahin-Mutlu, M.E.Ozen,
Programmed cell death (apoptosis) in placentas from normal pregnancy
and pregnancy complicated by term (t) and preterm (p) premature rupture
of membranes (PROM), Arch Gynecol Obstet (2005); pp. 98-103.
3. S. Kataoka, I. Furuta, H. Yamada, E.H. Kato, Y. Ebina, T. Kishida, N.
Kobayashi, S. Fujimoto, Increased apoptosis of human fetal membranes in
rupture of the membranes and chorioamnionitis, Placenta (2002), pp.
224-231.
4. U.U. Karniychuk, H.J. Nauwynck, Quantitative changes of sialoadhesin
and CD163 positive macrophages in the implantation sites and organs of
porcine embryos/fetuses during gestation, Placenta (2009), pp. 497-500.
5. S. Costers, D.J. Lefebvre, P.L. Delputte, H.J. Nauwynck, Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus modulates apoptosis during
replication in alveolar macrophages, Arch Virol (2008); pp. 1453-1465.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

VIRUS

A.112

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.30]
A LIVE, ATTENUATED CMV VACCINE PROTECTS AT THE PLACENTALFETAL INTERFACE IN THE GUINEA PIG MODEL OF CONGENITAL CMV
INFECTION
Mark R. Schleiss*, K. Yeon Choi, Alistair McGregor, Michael Leviton, Ryan
Buus, Center for Infectious Diseases and Microbiology Translational
Research, University of Minnesota, United States

ĂFigure 1. Triple immunoﬂuorescence staining for PRRSV (red), Sn (green) or CD163
(green) and nuclei (blue) in the fetal implantation sites (MSF: maternal secondary
fold) of the uterus coming from sows inoculated with PRRSV at 90 days of gestation
and sampled at 10 days post-inoculation. Bar, 100 mm. All PRRSV-positive cells in the
fetal mesenchyme were Sn+ and CD163+.

ĂFigure 2. Quantiﬁcation of TUNEL+ cells in the endometrium and fetal placentas
collected from sows inoculated with PRRSV at 90 days of gestation and non-inoculated sows. Animals were sampled at 10 days post-inoculation. Solid and dotted
lines are median and mean, respectively. Each box represents 25–75% of observations. Whiskers below and above the box represent the 10th and 90th percentiles.
Dots below or above the whiskers on each box represent outliers not included
between 10 and 90% of observation. Differences were considered statistically
signiﬁcant at p0.05.

A vaccine is needed to prevent neurodevelopmental sequelae in newborns
caused by congenital human cytomegalovirus infection. Preconception
vaccine strategies can be studied in the guinea pig, with a hemomonochorial placenta similar to humans, using guinea pig cytomegalovirus
(GPCMV). The objectives of this study were: 1) to assess in guinea pigs the
protective efﬁcacy of a recombinant live, attenuated vaccine with a targeted deletion of the GPCMV UL83 homolog, GP83; 2) to examine the role
of the placenta in vaccine-mediated protection. Outbred Hartley guinea
pigs were vaccinated prior to pregnancy with a two-dose series of 5x10^4^
pfu of attenuated vaccine. After mating, pregnant animals were challenged
with salivary gland-adapted (SG) GPCMV (1x10^6^ pfu) in the second
trimester, and pregnancy outcomes were compared to unvaccinated
controls. Following delivery, placentas were recovered, frozen, cryosectioned, and ISH using a GPCMV GP55 DNA probe was performed. Three
sections per placenta were analyzed by a blinded investigator and recorded as GPCMV positive or negative. Vaccination signiﬁcantly reduced
maternal DNAemia following SG challenge, and resulted in signiﬁcantly
decreased pup mortality in litters born to vaccinated dams (3/29; 10%),
compared to control (35/50; 70%; p<0.001). Recovered placentas from
vaccinated and control litters demonstrated placental infection in 6% (2/
17) placentas in the vAM409 vaccine group compared to 62% (13/21) in the
control group (p<0.001). Viral load at the placental level was also reduced.
Protection from preconception immunization is mediated at the placental
level, with vaccination conferring nearly complete protection against
placental GPCMV infection. This is the ﬁrst report of: 1) efﬁcacy against
congenital infection of a live virus vaccine with an attenuating targeted
gene deletion; 2) active immunization in an animal model of congenital
CMV conferring protection at the placental level. Live attenuated vaccines
generated using recombinant mutagenesis techniques may warrant
examination in future clinical trials of CMV vaccines.
Keywords: cytomegalovirus, vaccine, congenital infection, viral placental
infection

ĂFigure 3. Triple immunoﬂuorescence staining for apoptosis (green), PRRSV (red) and
nuclei (blue) in the fetal implantation sites (MSF: maternal secondary fold) of the
uterus coming from sows inoculated with PRRSV at 90 days of gestation and
sampled at 10 days post-inoculation. Bar, 200 mm. A spatial correlation between the
sites of PRRSV replication and TUNEL+ cells was observed.

Keywords: Placenta, PRRSV, Apoptosis, Macrophages

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.31]
PEPTIDE INHIBITION OF CYTOMEGALOVIRUS INFECTION
Lilia Melnik*, Robert Garry, Cindy Morris, Tulane University School of
Medicine, United States
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is the most prevalent congenital viral
infection in the United States and Europe. Treatment regimens for
congenital HCMV are controversial given the toxicity associated with
pharmacological agents used against the virus. The aim of this study was to
develop peptides targeting glycoprotein B (gB), a major glycoprotein of
HCMV that is highly conserved across the Herpesviridae, which speciﬁcally
inhibit HCMV-host cell membrane fusion.
Using the Wimley and White Interfacial Hydrophobicity Scale (WWIHS),
several regions within gB were identiﬁed that display a high potential to
interact with the lipid surface of cell membranes. Inhibitory effects of
synthetic peptides analogous to WWIHS-positive sequences of HCMV gB
were evaluated. Human foreskin ﬁbroblasts (HFF) were infected with the
Towne GFP strain of HCMV (0.5 MOI) preincubated with peptides at
concentrations ranging from 78 nm to 100 mM, and GFP positive cells were
visualized 48 hours post infection by ﬂuorescence microscopy or analyzed
quantitatively by ﬂow cytometry. Peptide 174-200 showed 80% inhibition of
viral infection at a concentration of 100 mM, and 51% and 62% inhibition at
concentrations of 5 mM and 2.5 mM, respectively. Peptide 233-263 displayed
97% and 92% inhibition at concentrations 100 mM and 50 mM, respectively,
and 60% inhibition at a concentration of 2.5 mM. While peptides 264-291
and 297-315 separately did not inhibit viral infection, when added together
they showed 67% inhibition at a concentration of 0.125 mM each. The ability
of peptides to inhibit HCMV infection required the interaction of peptides
with virions. Peptides designed to target potential fusogenic domains of gB
may prove to be novel therapeutics to thwart herpesvirus infection.
Keywords: HCMV, infection, peptide, therapeutics
[P3.32]
DIFFERENTIAL SUSCEPTIBILITY TO CYTOMEGALOVIRUS INFECTION BY
TWO EXTRAVILLOUS TROPHOBLAST-LIKE CELL LINES
K.J. Zwezdaryk*, J.A. Warner, B. Day, C. Morris, Tulane University, United
States

A.113

[P3.33]
INFECCIÓN DIFERENCIAL DEL TROFOBLASTO PLACENTARIO POR TRYPANOSOMA CRUZI IN VITRO
CM Díaz-Luján*, MF Triquell, L Mezzano, GM Mazzudulli, RE Fretes,
Department of Cell Biology, Histology and Embriology. Facultad Ciencias
Médicas. Institute of Cell Biology. UNC. UNLaR, Argentina
Congenital Chagas' disease is caused by Trypanosoma cruzi. Chorionic
villous does not allow a productive infection.
The Objective was analyze the susceptibility of the syncytiotrophoblast
(STB) and of the underlying cytotrophoblast (CTB) of chorionic villi to
infection by T. cruzi in vitro.
It was employed normal human placentas (n¼9) in three models of
interaction with 106 T. cruzi trypomastigotes. 1) Isolated trophoblast:
Employing CTB and differentiated STB for 48h. 2) Treated placental
explants: denuded of its STB co-cultured for 96h. 3) Untreated placental
explants (complete placental barrier) co-cultured for 96h. VERO cells as
control. Statistic Analysis was performed using Student't test and ANOVA.
(p<0.05).
Cells and tissue were stained with H/E, Giemsa and Cytokeratine-7 for CTB.
It was analyzed infection and quantiﬁed (Axiovision software), b-hCG and
nitrites, and parasite viability.
Level of infection of isolated STB and CTB were: T. cruzi occupied 1,38%
and 12,07% of the total area; 42 and 803 parasites per 100 syncytial or cell
nuclei, 12,25% and 41,40% of live parasites in the media culture, respectively. Differences were statistically signiﬁcant (p<0,05).
Level of infection of untreated explants and treated explants were: T.
cruzi occupied 0.019% and 1,33% of the total chorionic villi area, 4,52 and
54,7543,98 amastigotes per nest, 30,25 and 312,58 total nests, 0,96%
and 100% of live parasites in the supernatant media, respectively. Differences were statistically signiﬁcant (p<0,05).
Isolated cytotrophoblast and denuded chorionic villi are very susceptible
to infection by T. cruzi, contrary to the isolated syncytiotrophoblast and
complete chorionic villi. Any alteration in the syncytial layer of the chorionic villi and even the normal renewal of the STB could favor the infection of underlying cells such as cytotrophoblast and other resident cells,
which could provide a window for T. cruzi infection of the chorionic villi,
leading to the congenital Chagas infection.
Grants: SECyT-UNLaR, SECyT-UNC and MINCyT-Córdoba (PID 48).
Keywords: Chagas disease, Trypanosoma cruzi, trophoblast, infection

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is the leading cause of congenital viral
infection in the United States. It is well established that infection of cytotrophoblast cells (CTBs) by HCMV at the fetal-maternal interface, results in
complications during pregnancy. The exact mechanism required for HCMV
binding and entry into CTBs is still unclear. Epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and platelet-derived growth factor-a receptor (PDGFR) are
two known receptors utilized for binding and entry by HCMV in ﬁbroblast
and endothelial cells. The aim of this study is to ascertain the surface
receptors required for HCMV binding and internalization in the CTBs cell
lines, SGHPL-4 and SGHPL-5. Initially, studies were performed to compare
the infection kinetics between the two cell lines using laboratory and
clinical strains of HCMV. Interestingly, SGHPL-5 cells displayed minimal
viral protein expression, even at a high multiplicity of infection (MOI¼50).
Further studies suggested that HCMV was internalized in the SGHPL-5
cells, but that viral translocation to the nucleus appeared abrogated and no
viral replication occurred. Flow cytometry and western blot assays were
undertaken and different levels of surface receptor expression were
observed between the two cell lines. Of interest was the marked decrease
in EGFR levels and varying expression of numerous integrins co-receptors
in the SGHPL-5 cells. These data suggest, that although the two cell lines
are currently used interchangeably, there are important phenotypic
differences between them. Based on currently accepted surface receptor
proﬁles, our data suggest that the SGHPL-5 cells are further differentiated
as opposed to the SGHPL-4 cells. This information provides a strong model
to investigate the exact receptors required for HCMV binding and internalization steps in CTBs. With this information, therapy design can be
maximized against entry pathways utilized by HCMV during pregnancy.
Keywords: cytotrophoblast cells, cytomegalovirus, tyrosine kinase receptors, integrins

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.114

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.34]
TRYPANOSOMA CRUZI INDUCES APOPTOSIS IN HUMAN CHORIONIC
VILLI EXPLANTS
J Duaso*, G Rojo, G Cabrera, JD Maya, N Galanti, U Kemmerling et al, Universidad de Chile, Chile
Chagas’ disease, one of the major public health concerns in Latin America,
is caused by the haemophlagelated protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi. In vector
related diseases, it is second to malaria in prevalence and mortality (1). In
the past few years congenital transmission of T. cruzi has become more
important, and partly responsible for the “globalization of Chagas’ disease”
(2), constituting a public health problem of increasing relevance (3).
Diverse pathogens, including T. cruzi, are able to cross the placental barrier
and infect both the placenta and fetus (4, 5). Parasite invasion in cell
cultures has been studied in some depth. On the other hand, studies that
analyze parasite invasion in tissues and organs are scarce.
The activation or prevention of cell death seems to be a critical factor in the
outcome of an infection since it can facilitate or difﬁcult the pathogen
control and spreading. Apoptosis in the hosts can be managed during the
infection with microorganisms, such as parasites (6). T. cruzi can induce,
delay or inhibit apoptosis in host cells (7).
In order to determine induction of apoptosis of the chorionic villi tissue
during parasite invasion into placental villi, we incubate explants of
human chorionic villi with 105 and 106 trypomastigotes for 24 hours.
Induction of apoptotic cell death was determined by TUNEL analysis,
measurement of caspase 3- like activity and immunohistochemical
detection of caspase cleaved cytokeratin. Effective infection was tested by
inmunohistochemistry (Ac-cruzipain) and PCR. T. cruzi induces apoptosis
in chorionic villi, evidenced by increase in TUNEL positive cells (Fig 1),
caspase 3 like activity (Fig 2) and appearance of cytokeratin 18 neo-epitope
(Fig 3). Our results suggest that the induction of apoptosis in chorionic villi
helps the parasite to escape from the immune response; alternatively, it
could also be a protective mechanism of the placental tissue.
References:
1. http://www.who.int/tdr/publications/publications/swg_chagas.htm
2. Schmunis GA. (2007) Epidemiology of Chagas disease in non-endemic
countries: the role of international migration. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz.
30;102 Suppl 1:75-85.
3. Lescure FX et al (2008) Chagas Disease. Emerg Infect Dis. 14(4):644-646.
4. Sartori MJ, et al (2005) Cellular components and placental alkaline
phosphatase in Trypanosoma cruzi infection Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 38
Suppl 2:87-91.
5. Kemmerling U, et al (2010) Infection and invasion mechanisms of
Trypanosoma cruzi in the congenital transmission of Chagas' disease: A
proposal. Accepted for publication in Biological Research
6. de Souza, EM et al (2003) Host and parasite apoptosis following
Trypanosoma cruzi infection in in vitro and in vivo models. Cell Tissue Res
314:223–235
7. DosReis GA and Lopes MF (2001) The importance of apoptosis for
immune regulation in Chagas disease. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz, 104(Suppl.
I): 259-262
Acknowledgment:
This study was supported by grants 11080166 (to UK), 1090124 (to NG) and
1090078 (to JDM) from FONDECYT and CONICYT-PBCT Anillo ACT 112,
Chile.
Keywords: Trypanosoma cruzi, mechanism of tissue invasion

ĂFigure 1.

ĂFigure 2.

ĂFigure 3.

Keywords: Trypanosoma cruzi, chorionic villi, mechanism, infection

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.35]
TRYPANOSOMA CRUZI PRODUCE PLACENTAL STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS ASSOCIATED TO INCREASE OF OXIDATIVE STRESS IN VITRO
MF Triquell*1, CM Díaz-Luján1, L Mezzano1, MC Romanini2, GM Mazzudulli1, RE Fretes1, 1Cell Biology, Histology and Embriology department.
Medical School, National University of Cordoba, Argentina, 2Anatomy
department, Agronomy and Veterinary School, National University of Rio
Cuarto, Argentina
Human placenta would participate actively in the control of congenital
Chagas infection, which would explain, partially, the low transmission
rate. The production of pro-inﬂamatory citokynes such as TNFa among
others, promotes nitric oxide (NO) production by the endothelial placental
nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) that could be an important part of this
control. Nitric oxide reacts with oxygen species and produce peroxynitrites
are both trypanosides and potentially deleterious for the placental tissue.
Objetive: Analyze the structural alterations of the ﬁrst placental barrier,
the syncytiotrophoblast (STB), induced by two populations of T. cruzi
through increased TNFa, NOS and nitrosylated proteins (oxidative stress).
Methods: Placental villi explants co-cultured for 24 hs with 1x106 trypomastigotes of Tulahuen and Lucky strains (isolated from a congenital
case); controls without parasites, and with addition of crescent concentrations of H2O2 (50 mM, 100 mM, 200 mM and 500 mM). Histological and
Immunohistochemical analysis: of eNOS and Nitrotyrosine (NT) (SigmaScan) and detachment area of syncitiotrophoblast. In culture media:
quantiﬁcation of NO (Griess), TNFa (ELISA). NOSe RNA expression by
RT-PCR.
Results: Placental explants in presence of both strains of T. cruzi showed
a signiﬁcant rise of TNFa production, tyrosin nitrosilation and eNOS
expression, but a non signiﬁcant increase of NO production. The structural
alterations (STB detachment) were signiﬁcantly higher in presence of T.
cruzi and with H2O2 in a concentration dependent manner.
Discussion: The presence of T. cruzi in an in vitro model produced
detachment of the STB, associated with the increased production of TNFa,
expression of eNOS and oxidative stress, which could facilitate the infection of the chorionic villi. These results could explain the association of
some clinical aspects of the congenital Chagas disease, such as prematurely
and miscarriages, with the alterations associated with T. cruzi infection
showed and a new possible route of placental infection via chorionic villi.
Grants: SECyT-UNLaR; SECyT-UNC and MINCyT-Córdoba (PID 48)
Keywords: Congenital Chagas disease, Placenta, Oxidative stress, Trypanosoma cruzi

A.115

[P3.36]
REPRODUCTIVE PERFORMANCE AND PLACENTAL HISTOPATHOLOGY OF
RATS INFECTED WITH TRYPANOSOMA BRUCEI BRUCEI DURING
PRE-MATING PERIOD
I.S. Ochiogu*, C.N. Uchendu, J.I. Ihedioha, S.V.O. Shoyinka, University of
Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria
Introduction: Animal trypanosomosis, caused by some species of
trypanosomes, is an economically important disease of the livestock
industry, especially in Africa. It has many clinical manifestations (Taylor
and Authie, 2004) with the subspecie Trypanosoma brucei brucei reportedly causing severe reproductive disorders in infected animals (Ikede et al.,
1988; Sekoni, 1994). The present study examined the reproductive
performance of female rats infected with T. brucei brucei and their
placental pathology.
Methods: Ninety-eight mature wistar rats comprising 70 females and 28
males were used for the study. The females were divided into 4 groups: 25
infected 6 days prior to mating (I6BM), 10 infected non-pregnant (INPC), 25
uninfected but pregnant (UC) and 10 uninfected but sacriﬁced immediately post delivery (UCSD). Each infected rat received 2.50 x 105
trypanosomes in normal saline intraperitoneally. Packed cell volume
(PCV), level of parasitemia (LOP), and pregnancy-related parameters were
evaluated. Sections of the placentae routinely processed for histopathology were stained with hematoxylin and eosin while selected sections
were stained by Price's Giemsa method.
Results: The rats of I6BM group had more matings before conception
(P<0.05), longer length of gestation (P<0.05) and reduced litter size
(P<0.05) than the UC group. The I6BM group also had more resorbed
fetuses (P<0.05) than the UCSD group. In addition, longer survival time
and comparatively lower (P<0.05) LOP were observed in this group (I6BM)
than in the INPC group. The mean PCV of the I6BM and INPC groups were
similar but signiﬁcantly (P<0.05) lower than that of the UC group.
Placental histology of the infected rats revealed inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells indicative of placentitis.
Discussion: We attribute the observed prolonged gestation among the
infected pregnant rats to placental insufﬁciency and to possible production
of interleukin-4 (IL-4) and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), which have
been reported to promote antibody production and control the level of
parasitemia in infected animals that are pregnant.
Keywords: trypanosomes, placenta, infection, histopathology

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.116

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.37]
EMBRYONIC DEATH DUE TO TRITRICHOMONAS FOETUS IS ASSOCIATED
WITH INCREASED TH17 AND DIMINISHED HO-1 LEVELS IN A MURINE
MODEL

[P3.38]
THE MALARIAL PARASITE TOXIN, HEMOZOIN, ACTIVATES MAP KINASES
AND PROMOTES A CHEMOTACTIC AND IMMUNOSTIMULATORY
SECRETORY RESPONSE IN PRIMARY HUMAN SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST

MA Woudwyk*1,3, CE Monteavaro2, P Soto2, AC Zenclussen3, CG Barbeito1,
National University of La Plata, Argentina, 2National University of the
Center of Buenos Aires Province, Argentina, 3Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany

D Sarr*1, NW Lucchi2, S Owino1, DS Peterson1, JM Moore1, 1University of
Georgia, United States, 2Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United
States

1

Bovine genital tritrichomonosis is a venereal disease produced by the
ﬂagellate Tritrichomonas foetus. The disease is characterized by the
repetition of estrus and infertility due to embryonic death. We reproduced
genital tritrichomonosis in pregnant Balb/c mice, where embryonic death
occurs between days 5 and 8 of pregnancy. The pathogenic mechanism of
the embryonic death in tritrichomonosis is unclear. We hypothesized that
embryonic death may be due to an exacerbated maternal immune
response to the pathogen which may lead to increased levels of Th1
cytokines and to down-regulation of pregnancy-important mechanisms as
regulatory T cells or TGF-b production. Heme oxygenase-1 is an important
molecule whose up-regulation is related to tolerance to paternal alloantigens. Here, we analyzed the expression of pro- and anti-inﬂammatory
cytokines as well as of HO-1 in uterine tissue of infected mice by real time
RT-PCR in infected and non-infected control pregnant animals. TNFa, a Th1
cytokine, was augmented in infected mice. However, IL-10 and IL-4, Th2
cytokines, were also up-regulated at augmented at mRNA level in infected
vs. non-infected mice. Accordingly, foxp3, a Treg-associated- gene was
more expressed in the uterus of infected mice compared to controls. In
mice which have lost their conceptus, HO1 mRNA was decreased. The
RORgt mRNA which is a reliable marker for Th17 cells is augmented in the
uterus of infected mice. In the light of our data, we hypothesized that a T
effector response of type 1 may be responsible of the embryonic death
during tritrichomonosis, which alters protective mechanisms of the
embryo as e.g. HO-1 expression are altered. Increased Treg levels may
further facilitate embryonic death by promoting the persistence of infection due to its immunosuppressive effects. In conclusion, our model
reveals immunological mechanisms behind Tritrichomonas foetusmediated embryo death and may be of help in targeting this disease in the
future.
Keywords: embryonic death, Tritrichomonas foetus, Heme oxygenase 1,
T effector response

Malarial infection during pregnancy is characterized by sequestration of
parasitized erythrocytes and accumulation of the parasite hemoglobin
metabolite, hemozoin, and maternal mononuclear cells in the intervillous
space. We have shown that primary syncytiotrophoblast cells respond
immunologically to cytoadherent Plasmodium falciparum, in an in vitro
culture system, but their responsiveness to hemozoin, a potent proinﬂammatory stimulator of monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells,
has not been reported. Immunoblotting of primary syncytiotrophoblast
lysates revealed that exposure to hemozoin induced ERK1/2 and JNK
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation, the former response
being sensitive to inhibition of the upstream MEK1/2 kinase. These cells
subsequently secreted the chemokines CXCL8, CCL3, and CCL4 and
released soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and soluble TNF
receptors I and II as detected by ELISA. The stimulated cells also elicited the
speciﬁc migration of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in a two-chamber
assay. Finally, exposure of primary monocytes to conditioned medium
from hemozoin-stimulated syncytiotrophoblast resulted in the upregulation of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 on the monocytes. All of these
responses were speciﬁc to hemozoin, since synthetic hemozoin was relatively inert. Furthermore, the dependence of the hemozoin responses on
mitogen-activated protein kinase stimulation was conﬁrmed by inhibition
of chemokine release in syncytiotrophoblast pre-treated with MEK1/2
inhibitor. These ﬁndings conﬁrm an immunostimulatory role for native
hemozoin and expand the cell types known to be responsive to this
molecule to include fetal syncytiotrophoblast. Finally, the results provide
further evidence that syncytiotrophoblast cells can inﬂuence the local
maternal immune response to placental malaria.
Keywords: syncytiotrophoblast, chemokines, infection, malaria

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.117

[P3.39]
ADHERENCE OF PLASMODIUM FALCIPARUM INFECTED RED CELLS TO
THE TROPHOBLAST AND PLACENTAL INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE
STUDIED BY DUAL EX VIVO PERFUSION OF AN ISOLATED COTYLEDON

[P3.40]
ACTIVATION OF PPARGAMMA BY HUMAN CYTOMEGALOVIRUS FOR DE
NOVO REPLICATION IMPAIRS MIGRATION AND INVASIVENESS OF CYTOTROPHOBLAST FROM EARLY PLACENTA

CL King1, K May1, J Mostertz1, K Paprotka1, M Fraunholz1, M Grube1,
G Homuth3, W Siegmund2, M Zygmunt5, H Schneider*6 et al, 1Center for
Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
OH,, United States, 2Department of Pharmacology, Ernst Moritz Arndt
University of Greifswald, Germany, 3Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and
Functional Genomics, Ernst Moritz Arndt University of Greifswald,
Germany, 4Competence Center of Functional Genomics, Ernst Moritz Arndt
University of Greifswald, Germany, Germany, 5Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Ernst Moritz Arndt University of Greifswald, Germany,
Germany, 6Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Insel-Spital,
University of Berne, Switzerland

B Rawel1,3, T Fournier*1,4 et al, 1Inserm, France, 2CNRS, France, 3Université
Toulouse, France, 4Université Paris Descartes, France

Introduction: Pregnancy-associated malaria (PAM) results in maternal
anemia and poor birth outcome. Pathogenesis of PAM is associated with
accumulation of malaria-infected erythrocytes (irbc) in the intervillous
space of the placenta. The Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) erythrocyte
membrane protein-1(PfEMP-1) variant Var2CSA mediates the adherence
of irbc only in the schizont stage to syncytiotrophoblastic membrane via
binding to chondroitin A sulphate. Here we investigate the adherence of
malaria infected erythrocytes and placental inﬂammatory response of the
trophoblast using the dual ex vivo perfusion of an isolated cotyledon.
Method: Following a 60 min closed loop perfusion of both circuits the
experiment consists of three phases, each lasting 120 min. In phase I the
perfusate consists of medium alone, in phase II uninfected red cells (urbc)
and in phase III again urbcs or red blood cells infected with either CS2
(placental adherent) or 3D7 (placental non-adherent) strain of Pf are
suspended in perfusate at a hematocrit of 10%. Samples were collected
from the maternal and fetal perfusate at 15 or 30 min intervals and tissue
biopsies were taken before and after perfusion.
Results: Schizont stage of the placental-adherent strain CS2 showed
a marked decline within 45 minutes of adding parasites indicating
sequestration of the parasite in the placenta, whereas the non-adherent
ring and early trophozoite stages did not (n¼1). By contrast the nonplacental adherent 3D7 failed to show any sequestration (n¼2). The release
of the macrophage chemokine MIF into perfusate without red cells (n¼5)
or with urcbs (n¼7) increased with time. When malaria parasites are
added in phase III, MIF release almost doubles (n¼3). Microarray based
gene expression analysis data from perfused tissue showed substantial
upregulation of a number of early pro-inﬂammatory mediators such as the
cytokines IL-1ß, TNFa, IL-6, the chemokines IL-8, MIP-1a, CCL3, etc and their
receptors. Addition of Pf irbcs induced further expression changes notably
an increase in c-fos (n¼3).
Summary: The preferential sequestration of the CS2 strain in the IVS is
seen ex vivo in dually perfused placental tissue. The release of the
macrophage chemokine MIF and upregulation of the gene encoding the
transcription factor c-fos, both of which are associated with immunoregulatory responses seem to be malaria induced, whereas the appearance of
other chemokines and proinﬂammatory cytokines is an unspeciﬁc
response to oxidative and hypoxic stress related to ex vivo perfusion. The
release of the chemokines and cytokines is directed towards the maternal
compartment with only trace amounts detectable in the fetal circuit.
Keywords: placental malaria, trophoblast adherence, inﬂammatory
response, gene proﬁle

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) contributes to pathogenic processes in
immuno-suppressed individuals, in fetuses and in neonates and infection
during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy is known to cause miscarriages and
low-birth weight newborns. It is known that infection of the placenta
precedes the transmission to the fetus. HCMV takes advantage of the host
response to facilitate and enhance its replication and use the cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2)-dependent prostaglandin pathway for transcription
of the essential immediate-early gene IE2. However, no molecular mechanism was reported so far. The fact that Cox-2 activation could serve as
a source of ligand for the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARg) and that PPARg plays a pivotal role in
controlling human trophoblast invasion led us to hypothesize that HCMV
could impair early placentation through activation of PPARg.
Methods and ﬁndings: By using reporter gene activation assays and
confocal microscopy in the presence of speciﬁc antagonist, we show for the
ﬁrst time that HCMV infection induced PPARg transcriptional activity in
infected cells. We demonstrated that PPARg antagonist dramatically
impaired IE2 mRNA expression and virus production and that the major
immediate-early promoter (MIEP) contained PPAR response elements
(PPRE) able to bind PPARg as assessed by EMSA and ChIP assays. We then
provided evidence that by activating PPARg, HCMV dramatically impaired
early human trophoblast migration and invasiveness, as assessed by using
well-established in vitro models of invasive trophoblast i.e. primary
cultures of extravillous cytotrophoblasts isolated from ﬁrst trimester
placentas and the extravillous cytotrophoblast-derived cell line HIPEC.
Conclusions: Our data provide the ﬁrst evidence that HCMV use the
transcriptional activity of PPARg for its replication and as a consequence
inhibit trophoblastic cell invasion. This novel ﬁnding provides new clues to
explain how infection during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy could impair
implantation, placentation and therefore embryonic development.
Keywords: Trophoblast invasion, CMV infection, PPARgamma, human
placentation

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.118

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.41]
THE ROLE OF HOFBAUER CELLS AND DECIDUAL MACROPHAGES IN
MOTHER-TO-CHILD TRANSMISSION OF HIV-1

[P3.42]
ROLE OF PROSTAGLANDINS IN THE PRETERM DELIVERY INDUCED BY
SHIGA TOXIN IN RATS IN THE LATE STAGE OF PREGNANCY

Erica Johnson*, Byeongwoon Song, Devi Rajan, Rana Chakraborty, Emory
University School of Medicine, United States

J Burdet*1, M Cella2, AM Franchi2, C Ibarra1, 1Laboratorio de Fisiopatogenia,
Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Argentina, 2CEFYBO-CONICET, Universidad de Buenos Aires,
Argentina

During pregnancy, in utero HIV-1 infection is a relatively rare occurrence so
that most transmission events occur at delivery or postpartum through
breastfeeding. Even in the absence of antiretroviral therapy, 90% of fetuses
evade in utero transmission, which occurs most commonly during the
third trimester suggesting that the placenta plays an on-going role in
controlling HIV-1 transmission. Cells within the placenta consist of
decidual cells whose lineages including natural killer, regulatory T and
antigen presenting cells. Intriguingly these cells interdigitate with the
endometrial blood supply, while expressing DCSIGN, CD4 and CCR5 on
their cell surface. In a pregnant female with HIV-1 infection, virus-exposed
decidual cells expressing these ligands should be readily infectable targets
with migratory properties to disseminate virus and facilitate in utero HIV-1
transmission. The reason why in utero transmission occurs only rarely is
not entirely clear but could reﬂect the limiting nature or permissivity of
decidual antigen presenting cells (dAPCs) to cell-free HIV-1 infection and/
or the absence of cellular activation in the placental milieu. These properties may contrast with other APC subpopulations in mucosa and blood in
respect of uptake and transport of HIV-1, and/or the unique migratory
properties of dAPCs. In this study, we examined evidence of infection and
immunity in dAPCs within the placenta, speciﬁcally CD68+ HLA-II+
CD14low S100+/- CD83- CD86- cmrf-44- cells in chorionic villi, consistent
with Hofbauer cells [HCs] and also CD68+ HLA-II+CD14high S100- CD83CD86- cmrf-44- decidual macrophages (DMs). Here we show by viral
infectivity assays and ﬂow cytometry that HCs and DMs are capable of
supporting HIV-1 replication. Upon activation, these cells have limited
capacity to activate, migrate and infect peripheral and cord blood mononuclear cells which may account for reduced MTCT of HIV-1. Potential
restriction factors include TRIM5a, APOBEC-3G, and tetherin.
Keywords: HIV, Hofbauer, Macrophage, Decidua

Infection associated with Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC)
and subsequent Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome (HUS) became relevant in
public health since it was considered as one of the most important
emergent pathogens. The major virulence factor of STEC is Shiga toxin type
1 or 2 (Stx1, Stx2). Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) infections
could be one of the causes of fetal morbimortality in pregnant women. We
had reported that rats in the late stage of pregnancy treated with Stx2
induced premature delivery of dead fetuses.
Our previous results suggest that nitric oxide (NO) is partially involved in
these mechanisms, since aminoguanidine, an iNOS speciﬁc inhibitor,
blocks the effects of Stx2 on rat pregnancy.
Objective: Our aim was to evaluate the role of prostaglandins (PGs) in the
mechanisms by which Stx2 induced preterm delivery.
Materials and methods: Pregnant rats on days 14-16 of gestation were i.p.
injected with culture supernatant from recombinant E. coli containing 0.4
mg/ml Stx2 and 30 ng/ml LPS (sStx2).
PGE and PGF2a levels were evaluated by radioimmunoassay analyses in
deciduas and placentas from treated rats killed 12 h post sStx2 injection.
Results: Injection of sStx2 induced preterm delivery of live fetuses and
dead fetuses depending on the toxin concentration.
PGs production was detectable in deciduas and placenta from control
animals. Stx2 increased the PGs levels in both tissues of treated rats in
a dose dependent manner 12 h post-injection (p<0.05).
Conclusions: Our results suggest that the increased of PGs could be
modulated by the increased of iNOS activity observed in these experimental conditions. Further experiments could be necessary to clarify if PGs
play a central role in Stx2-induced preterm delivery.
Keywords: Shiga toxin, rat pregnancy, infection, prostaglandins

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.119

[P3.43]
VITAMIN D REGULATES CATHELICIDIN ANTIMICROBIAL PROTEIN, IL1
AND TNF, BUT NOT GROWTH, IL12A OR IL27 IN CULTURED HTR-8/
SVNEO HUMAN PLACENTAL TROPHOBLASTS

[P3.45]
OXYGEN SENSITIVE POTASSIUM CHANNELS MODULATE HUMAN
CHORIONIC GONADOTROPIN (HCG) SECRETION IN HUMAN TERM
SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST

P.M. Brannon*, J.T. Caty, S. Jones, Cornell University, United States

P Diaz*, CP Sibley, SL Greenwood, University of Manchester, United
Kingdom

The placenta synthesizes active 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1, 25(OH)2D3],
which may suppress the maternal immune system by regulating placental
immunomodulatory peptides and hormones. Whether it also regulates
placental growth is unknown. To determine the activation of vitamin D by
trophoblasts in vitro and its regulation of placental immunomodulatory
peptides and growth, HTR-8/SVneo human trophoblasts were cultured
with 1, 25(OH)2D3 or 25-hydroxy-vitamin D3 [25OHD3] (100-1000 nM) or
0.1% ethanol (C) for 24 h. To determine its temporal regulation, trophoblasts were cultured with C or 1, 25(OH)2D3 (0.1- 100 nM) for 48-96 h.
Interleukins (IL1b, IL12A and IL27), tumor necrosis factor a (TNFa), cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide (CAMP), Ki-67, and human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) mRNA levels were measured by RT-PCR. Growth and
media hCG levels were also measured. 1, 25(OH)2D3 and 25OHD3 both
increased CAMP mRNA levels 1 fold (p<0.001), but did not affect IL-27 and
IL-12 A mRNA levels at 24 h. 1, 25(OH)2D3 increased CAMP mRNA levels 4896 h (10 and 100 nM) or 72-96 h (1 nM) 1-2.5 fold (p<0.001). 1, 25(OH)2D3
(0.1-100 nM) also slightly increased TNFa mRNA levels (0.5-0.75 fold) at 96
h (p< 0.001), but only 10 nM 1, 25(OH)2D3 increased IL1b slightly (0.5 fold)
at 96 h (p<0.001). Vitamin D did not affect growth of the cells from 24-96
h. 1, 25(OH)D3 (1-100 nM) decreased hCG mRNA levels approximately 0.4
fold only at 48 h, but did not alter secreted hCG levels. HTR-8/SVneo human
trophoblasts do activate 25OHD3, which does regulate immunomodulatory
peptide expression in these cells. Vitamin D, thus, may modulate inﬂammation at the maternal-fetal interface and trophoblast differentiation
through its regulation of TNF-a and IL-1b and may play a role in protecting
the maternal-fetal interface and placental tissue from infection through its
regulation of innate immunity and CAMP.
Keywords: vitamin D, trophoblasts, cytokines, innate immunity
[P3.44]
INFLAMMATION-MEDIATED INTRAUTERINE GROWTH RESTRICTION IN
RATS IS LINKED TO DEFICIENT UTERO-PLACENTAL PERFUSION

Introduction: Potassium (K+) channels regulate cellular proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis and hormone secretion in many tissues. These
processes maintain syncytiotrophoblast and are inﬂuenced by oxygen
tension (O2). Here we test the hypothesis that O2-sensitive K+ channels
modulate hCG secretion from term placental syncytiotrophoblast.
Methods: Placental explants from normal pregnancy were cultured at 21%
(n¼8), 6% (n¼8) and 1% (n¼3) O2 for 6 days. Medium was collected to
measure hCG secretion and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release, a marker
of necrosis. On days 3-5, explants were treated with 5mM 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) or 5mM tetraethylammonium (TEA), blockers of
O2-sensitive voltage-gated (KV) and calcium-activated (KCa) K+ channels.
At day 6, tissue was lysed in H2O and hCG measured to indicate cellular
levels. To assess the effect of O2 on K+ permeability, 86Rb efﬂux was
determined (day 6) in untreated explants. Data are median +/- IQR.
Results: At culture day 6, hCG secretion (mIU/ml/hr/mg protein) was
signiﬁcantly lower at 6% than 21%O2 (0.6 +0.3/-0.8 vs 1.2 +0.8/-2.1; p<0.02)
and further reduced at 1%O2 (0.3 n¼3). At 21%O2, 4-AP and TEA signiﬁcantly inhibited hCG secretion (day 6) (33% +30/-36 and 58% +51/-78 of
control; p<0.03) but had no effect at 6% or 1%O2. LDH release was similar
in all conditions. 4-AP/TEA did not alter cellular hCG at 21% or 6% O2 (n¼4).
86Rb efﬂux from explants maintained at 6%O2 was half that at 21%O2
(n¼2).
Discussion: We propose that low O2 inhibits hCG secretion from syncytiotrophoblast by inactivating K+ channels. KV/KCa channels may mediate
this effect as 4-AP/TEA inhibited hCG secretion at 21%O2 but not at lower
O2 when the channels may already be inactivated. Reduced O2 is a feature
of speciﬁc pregnancy pathologies and inactivation of KV/KCa could
contribute to abnormal maintenance of syncytiotrophoblast in these
conditions.
Supported by CONICYT-Becas Chile 72090593 and Action Medical
Research.
Keywords: human placenta, ion channels, hypoxia

T. Cotechini*1, S.J. Renaud2, J.S. Quirt1, S.K. Macdonald-Goodfellow1, C.H.
Graham1, 1Queen's University, Canada, 2Institute of Maternal-Fetal Biology,
United States
A maternal inﬂammatory response during pregnancy is causally linked to
the development of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Although the
mechanism underlying the development of inﬂammation-associated IUGR
has not been fully characterized, there is evidence that impaired placental
perfusion plays a key role. In this study, we used a model in which pregnant rats were given chronic injections of E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to
determine whether aberrant maternal immune activation has a detrimental effect on the structure of the utero-placental vasculature resulting
in IUGR. Compared with pups from saline-injected dams, pups from rats
receiving daily intraperitoneal injections of LPS (40mg/kg) on gestational
days 14.5, 15.5, 16.5 and 17.5 were signiﬁcantly growth restricted
(p<0.001). Utero-placental vascular corrosion casts made three hours after
the ﬁnal LPS injection revealed abnormalities in the structure of spiral
arterioles and maternal arterial channels (MAC). Immunohistochemistry
revealed decreased endovascular trophoblast inﬁltration in the spiral
arterioles of LPS-treated rats as compared to saline-treated controls;
distally (away from the MAC), many of these vessels lacked trophoblasts.
LPS-mediated IUGR was also associated with ﬁbrin deposition in the
lumen of the utero-placental vasculature. Together, these results reveal
that abnormal vascular structure is linked to the development of inﬂammation-associated IUGR. Our ﬁndings support a rationale for investigating
a potential use of immunomodulatory agents in the prevention of IUGR.
(Supported by the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Ontario).
Keywords: Lipopolysaccharide, Inﬂammation, Utero-placental perfusion,
Endovascular trophoblast invasion

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.120

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.46]
SPREADING ENDOTHELIAL CELL DYSFUNCTION: SOLUBLE FACTORS
RELEASED FROM ENDOTHELIAL CELLS THAT HAVE PHAGOCYTOSED
NECROTIC SYNCYTIAL KNOTS CAUSE DYSFUNCTION OF ADDITIONAL
ENDOTHELIAL CELLS
Jinxin Ding1, Bonnia Liu2, Peter Stone2, Youji Feng1, Qi Chen*1,2, Larry
Chamley2, 1Fudan University, China, 2The University of Auckland, New
Zealand
Introduction: Preeclampsia is characterised by hypertension and proteinurea and these maternal symptoms are thought to be dependent upon
endothelial cell dysfunction. The cause of preeclampsia is unclear but it is
known to be triggered by a factor from the placenta. One of the possible
triggering factors is dead fragments of the placenta, called syncytial knots,
which become trapped in the maternal lungs where they are phagocytosed
by the endothelium of the pulmonary capillaries. We have previously
shown phagocytosis of necrotic syncytial knots induced endothelial cell
activation involving release of inﬂammatory cytokines whereas, phagocytosis of apoptotic syncytial knots did not affect endothelial cells. We
hypothesised that factors released from endothelial cells after they have
phagocytosed necrotic syncytial knots would adversely affect multiple
functions of endothelial cells from remote sites.
Methods: Conditioned medium from endothelial cell monolayers that had
phagocytosed either apoptotic or necrotic syncytial knots that had been
shed from an in vitro placental explant model were centrifuged then
exposed to fresh subconﬂuent endothelial cell monolayers. The proliferation of endothelial cells was measured by Alamar Blue assay and endothelial cell surface endoglin was quantiﬁed by ELISA.
Results: The proliferation of endothelial cells was signiﬁcantly (p ¼ 0.004)
reduced after treatment with conditioned medium from endothelial cells
that had phagocytosed necrotic but not apoptotic syncytial knots. In
addition, endothelial cell surface endoglin levels were signiﬁcantly (p
¼0.001) reduced after treatment with conditioned medium from endothelial cells that had phagocytosed necrotic but not apoptotic syncytial
knots.
Discussion: Our results suggest a mechanism to explain how necrotic
syncytial knots phagocytosed by endothelial cells in the maternal
pulmonary capillaries could lead to the systemic endothelial cell activation
that is characteristic of preeclampsia.
Keywords: trophoblast deportation, endothelium dysfunction, cytokines

[P3.47]
PLACENTA-SPECIFIC MIRNAS DERIVED FROM THE MIRNA CLUSTER IN
THE CHROMOSOME 19 WERE UPREGULATED IN PRE-ECLAMPSIA
PLACENTAS
O Ishibashi*1, R Kurashina1, A Ohkuchi2, S Matsubara2, T Takeshita1,
T Takizawa1 et al, 1Nippon Medical School, Japan, 2Jichi Medical University,
Japan
Objective: Pre-eclampsia (PE) increases not only maternal but also
infantile morbidity/mortality. Early detection of PE is one of the most
important issues in Perinatology. Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are singlestranded non-coding RNAs of approximately 22 nucleotides in length, and
accumulating evidence indicates that they serve as promising biomarkers
for various diseases. In this study, with an aim to discover miRNAs as
promising biomarkers for PE, we quantitatively determined differential
expression of miRNAs in placentas from normal and PE pregnancy using
a real-time PCR-based miRNA array.
Materials and Methods: Human placentas from normal and severe PE
were obtained according to protocols approved by the Nippon Medical
School Hospital Ethics Committee and the Jichi Medical School Ethics
Committee. Total RNAs from normal and PE placentas (n¼10 for each)
were isolated. Subsequently miRNA-derived cDNAs were synthesized
using Megaplex Primer Pools (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA),
and subjected to real-time PCR analyses using TaqMan Array microRNA
Cards (Applied Biosystems). MiRNAs with signiﬁcantly differential
expression were identiﬁed by statistical analyses using Mann-Whitney U
Test. MiRNAs upregulated signiﬁcantly in PE placentas were further
analyzed by the laser microdissection (LMD) of human placenta sections to
examine which cell types express them.
Results: We identiﬁed 44 miRNAs upregulated signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05) in
placentas from PE pregnancy, 9 of which were placenta-speciﬁc miRNAs
derived from the primate-speciﬁc miRNA cluster in the Chromosome 19.
LMD analyses revealed that most of the upregulated placenta-speciﬁc
miRNAs were predominantly expressed in villous trophoblasts..
Conclusion: This study revealed for the ﬁrst time that placenta-speciﬁc
miRNAs were deregulated in PE placentas. Thus, these miRNAs could be
promising biomarkers for the diagnosis, especially early diagnosis, of PE.
Keywords: microRNA, preeclampsia, laser microdissection, miRNA array

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.48]
INJECTION OF NECROTIC TROPHOBLASTIC CELLS INCREASED BLOOD
PRESSURE IN THE FINAL THIRD OF GESTATION IN RATS
S Lau1,2, S-J Guild2, CJ Barrett2, SC Malpas2, LW Chamley*1, 1Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, School of Medicine, University of Auckland,
New Zealand, 2Department of Physiology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Auckland, New Zealand
During pregnancy large numbers of dead trophoblastic cells are extruded
from the placenta into the maternal blood. In normal pregnancy these
deported trophoblasts are thought to die via programmed cell death
whereas, in preeclampsia they may die by a more necrotic mechanism.
Many deported trophoblasts become lodged against the capillary endothelium of the maternal lungs. We have shown, in vitro, that phagocytosis
of necrotic trophoblasts leads to activation of endothelial cells, which is
a hallmark of preeclampsia. We postulate that necrotic deported trophoblasts are one of the placental factors that trigger the maternal endothelial
cell activation and vascular dysfunction of preeclampsia. This preliminary
study was undertaken in order to investigate whether necrotic trophoblastic cells would induce hypertension in vivo.
Groups of 3 female Wistar rats were chronically instrumented with
a continuously recharging blood pressure telemetry device (Telemetry
Research) and an injection port secured into the ascending Jugular. After
recovery, the animals were date-mated and on day 6 of pregnancy were
injected daily for the remaining two weeks of gestation with either, Jeg-3
cells (5x106 /body weight) that had been rendered necrotic by freezethawing, or with vehicle.
The mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) the two groups of rats was not
signiﬁcantly different during the second week of gestation but the MAP of
the control rats declined in the last week of gestation in accordance with
the literature. In contrast, the MAP of the group of rats injected with
necrotic Jeg-3 cells did not decline and was signiﬁcantly higher (p¼0.0001)
than the control group.
Our results suggest that necrotic trophoblastic cells can adversely affect
blood pressure, increasing it signiﬁcantly above the normal levels that
would be expected in late gestation as occurs in preeclampsia. This work
provides preliminary evidence that necrotic trophoblasts may be one of
the placental triggers of preeclampsia.
Keywords: blood pressure, deported trophoblasts, necrotic, endothelium

A.121

[P3.49]
THE PROFORM OF EOSINOPHIL MAJOR BASIC PROTEIN (PROMBP) IS
REDUCED IN FIRST TRIMESTER MATERNAL SERUM IN WOMEN DEVELOPING SEVERE PRE-ECLAMPSIA AND HELLP SYNDROME
M Christiansen*1, S Placing1, P.L. Hedley1,2, K.R. Wøjdemann3, A-C. Shalmi3
et al, 1Statens Serum Institut, Denmark, 2Stellenbosch University, South
Africa, 3Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Denmark
Background: Preeclampsia (PE) is a major contributor to fetal and
maternal morbidity and mortality. Recently, the concentration of the
pregnancy-associated proform of eosinophil major basic protein (ProMBP),
the endogenous inhibitor of IGFBP-2 – and -4 protease and ligand of
angiotensinogen, was found reduced in ﬁrst trimester in pregnancies that
developed PE. We examined the level of ProMBP in ﬁrst trimester serum in
PE pregnancies and the relation between clinical characteristics of PE and
the ProMBP level.
Methods: The ProMBP concentration was determined in ﬁrst trimester
(gestational week 10+3 – 13+6) serum samples from 123 PE pregnancies and
285 control pregnancies.
Results: ProMBP was reduced by 16% (p ¼ 0.001) in PE pregnancies, and by
25 % in patients developing severe PE (n ¼ 21) and HELLP syndrome (n ¼
6). ProMBP increased signiﬁcantly with gestational age (p ¼ 0.001) and
maternal BMI (p < 0.001) in controls. PAPP-A and ProMBP correlated
signiﬁcantly in both controls and PE pregnancies. ProMBP as a screening
marker for severe PE and HELLP syndrome had a detection rate of 45 % for
a false positive rate of 20 %.
Conclusions ProMBP is reduced in ﬁrst trimester maternal serum in
pregnancies that develop severe PE and HELLP syndrome. The reduction in
ProMBP could inﬂuence the bioavailability of IGF-I and –II at the maternalfetal interface and thus affect trophoblast invasion or could interfere with
the local renin-angiotensin system. The clinical usefulness of ProMBP as
a marker for severe PE and HELLP syndrome remains to be clariﬁed,
particularly when compared to other markers.
Keywords: eosinophil major basic protein, ﬁrst trimester, screening

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.122

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.50]
LEPTIN AND SOLUBLE LEPTIN RECEPTOR IN FIRST TRIMESTER PREGNANCY SERUM: A METABOLIC MARKER OF PREECLAMPSIA
P.L. Hedley*1,2, S. Placing1, K.R. Wøjdemann3, A-C. Shalmi3, A.L. Carlsen1,
M. Christiansen1 et al, 1Statens Serum Institut, Denmark, 2University of
Stellenbosch, South Africa, 3Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Denmark
Background: The maternal serum concentration of the adipocytokine
leptin (Lp) is increased in second and third trimester of pregnancies that
develop pre-eclampsia (PE). We wanted to assess the signiﬁcance of Lp and
its soluble receptor (sLR) as well as the free leptin index (fLI) in ﬁrst
trimester sera from women developing preeclampsia (PE) and controls.
Design and Patients: Retrospective case control study using ﬁrst trimester
serum samples, 123 from singleton pregnancies that developed PE and 285
control pregnancies matched for gestational age, parity and maternal age,
from the Copenhagen First Trimester Screening Study.
Results: Maternal serum Lp was signiﬁcantly increased, median 22.7 ng/mL
(range: 5.0 – 70.1 ng/mL) in PE pregnancies compared to median 13.9 ng/mL
(range: 2.0 – 54.3 ng/mL) in controls (p < 0.001). On the contrary, sLR was
signiﬁcantly reduced, median 27.7 ng/mL (range: 14.3 – 100.9 ng/mL) in PE
pregnancies compared to controls, median 36.9 ng/mL (range: 15.1 – 71.8
ng/mL) (p < 0.001). There was no signiﬁcant correlation between neither
the Lp nor sLR level and clinical severity of PE. In patients developing severe
PE there was a signiﬁcant negative correlation (Spearman's rho ¼ -0.501, p
¼ 0.03) between the level of TNFa and fLI, whereas in patients developing
mild PE, this correlation was positive (Spearman's rho ¼ 0.403, p < 0.008).
In controls no correlation was found between TNFa and fLI.
Conclusions: The constantly increased Lp and fLI in PE pregnancies in ﬁrst
trimester suggests that either may be very early and easily used markers of
PE. The relation between TNFa and fLI differs between severe and mild PE
suggesting that fLI plays a prognostic role in PE.
Keywords: leptin, metabolism, ﬁrst trimester

[P3.51]
PLACENTAL PROTEIN-13 (PP13) IN COMBINATION WITH PAPP-A AND
FREE LEPTIN INDEX (FLI) IN FIRST TRIMESTER MATERNAL SERUM
SCREENING FOR SEVERE AND EARLY PREECLAMPSIA
CP De Villiers1,2, PL Hedley1,2, KR Wøjdemann3, K Sundberg3, A Tabor3,
M Christiansen*1 et al, 1Statens Serum Institut, Denmark, 2University of
Stellenbosch, South Africa, 3Copenhagen University Hospital, Denmark
Background: Placental protein-13 is synthesised by the placenta and is
belived to play a role in placental invasion. It has been described as a ﬁrst
and second trimester maternal serum marker for preeclampsia (PE).
However, the discriminatory ability of PP13 has not been completely
clariﬁed.
Materials and Methods: PP13 was determined in maternal serum from
120 pregnancies that later developed PE and 267 controls. All serum
samples were from gestational week 10+3 – 13+6. Clinical and biochemical
parameters as well as pregnancy outcome were studied as a function of
PP13. The population performance of PP13 in combination with the PE
markers PAPP-A and fLI was assessed by Monte Carlo simulation.
Results: PP13 was decreased in PE cases, with a median of 51.8 pg/mL
(range: 13.1 – 534 pg/mL), compared to controls with a median of 54.8 pg/
mL (range: 15.4 – 142.6 pg/mL) (p ¼ 0.037). In severe PE and HELLP cases (n
¼ 26) the median was 35.8 pg/mL (range: 17.8 – 85.5 pg/mL). In PE cases
resulting in birth prior to week 34, the median was 30.6 pg/mL (13.1 – 50.1
pg/mL). In mild PE cases PP13 was not signiﬁcantly different from the level
in controls. PAPP-A and PP13 correlated signiﬁcantly in controls (Spearman's rho ¼ 0.233, p <0.001), but not in PE pregnancies. fLI did not
correlate in neither controls nor PE pregnancies. The population screening
detection rate for a false positive rate of 10% for severe PE and HELLP was
26% for PP13, 28% for PP13+PAPP-A and 40% for PP13+PAPP-A+fLI.
Conclusion: PP13 is a moderately effective ﬁrst trimester marker of severe
PE and HELLP syndrome, but not for mild PE. The discriminatory ability of
PP13 can be markedly improved by adding fLI.
Keywords: PP13, PAPP-A, screening, ﬁrst trimester

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.52]
SERUM URIC ACID MAY BE A DIFFERENTIAL BIOMARKER OF RISK OF
PREECLAMPSIA, ECLAMPSIA AND GESTATIONAL HYPERTENSION
DEVELOPMENT
AI Corominas2, S Balconi2, V Dietrich1, B Maskin2, AE Damiano*1,
1
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Hospital Nacional Prof. Dr. A.
Posadas, Argentina
Preeclampsia is a hypertensive disorder unique to human pregnancy
which etiology is still unknown. It is responsible for approximately 12% of
the world maternal deaths. Clinically, it is diagnosed primarily by the onset
of hypertension and proteinuria in the later half of gestation. Eclampsia is
the ﬁnal and most severe phase of preeclampsia and can cause coma,
seizures and even death of the mother and baby.
Gestational hypertension is deﬁned as the development of new arterial
hypertension in a pregnant woman after 20 weeks of gestation without
proteinuria.
Up to now, predicting which women is at risk of developing preeclampsia
-eclampsia is difﬁcult.
Here, we evaluate uric acid concentrations during the course of pregnancy
to differentiate women who are at risk of preeclampsia-eclampsia development from women who have gestational hypertension.
We conducted a case-control study of 138 women (49 with uncomplicated
pregnancies, 62 with preeclampsia, 17 with eclampsia and 10 with gestational hypertension). Serum uric acid, proteinuria, urea and creatinine
were measured both before and after the 20th week of gestation.
We compared all groups and found no signiﬁcant differences in serum uric
acid levels before the 20th week of gestation. However, after the 20th
weeks of gestation serum uric acid levels from preeclamptic-eclamptic
women were higher than levels from women with gestational hypertension (P<0,05). Serum urea and creatinine proﬁles in all groups showed no
differences and the proteins in urine were also negative until the hypertension appeared in the preeclamptic-elamptic group.
In conclusion, we suggest that an increase in the levels of uric acid,
documented by two sequential measurements between the 20th and 30th
weeks of gestation, may be useful to deﬁne and differentiate a risk group
with requirements of more frequent controls to detect the clinical changes
involved in the appearance of hypertensive gestational disorders.
Keywords: Preeclampsia, Eclampsia, Gestational Hypertension, Uric Acid

A.123

[P3.53]
SEASONAL VARIATION IN PRE-ECLAMPSIA IN AFRICAN AMERICANS
LIVING IN NEW YORK CITY A PILOT STUDY
Karen Florio D.O., Carolyn Salaﬁa M.D., Orna Gil M.D., Kathyrn Keaty M.D.,
Angela Stickline M.D., and Sanford Lederman M.D., New York Methodist
Hospital Cornell-Presbyterian, Brooklyn, NY
Objective: To evaluate the seasonal incidence of pre-eclampsia and the
associated severity of placental inﬂammation in the African American
population.
Methods: 350 African American and 67 Caucasian women with singleton
pregnancies delivering from 1/2006-12/ 2009 were included. Medical
records were reviewed and the following parameters were evaluated:
maternal age, BMI, last menstrual period, parity, gestational age at
delivery, 24 hour urine protein, blood pressure, liver function tests, birth
weight, placental weight and placental chronic inﬂammation (chronic
villitis), and maternal medical history. The incidence of conception was
assumed to be uniform across calendar months. Kolmogorov-Smirnov
tests were performed to test whether the distribution of months of
conception differed from uniform in the population, and in AfricanAmericans compared to Caucasians. Contingency tables compared distributions of categorical variables. Placental weight was analyzed as the
residual after adjustment for gestational age in Mann-Whitney U tests.
Results: The distribution of months of conception differed signiﬁcantly
from a normal distribution in the population; this effect was conﬁned to
African-Americans (K-S Z¼3.01, p<0.0001), with the difference in Caucasians being of borderline signiﬁcance (K-S z¼1.78, p¼0.059). Gestational
age at delivery and placental weights did not differ by month of conception, nor did the rate of severe pre-eclampsia. Consistent with a lack of
effect on placental weight, no placental pathologies differed between
races; chronic villitis was present in 15% of placentas of African American
mothers, compared with 11% of Caucasians.
Conclusion: Our data support an effect of seasonality on the incidence of
preeclampsia in African-American but not in Caucasian mothers, consistent with the hypothesis that Vitamin D deﬁciency moderates maternal
inﬂammatory responses and may predispose to preeclampsia. We did not
ﬁnd evidence that systemic maternal inﬂammatory pathology has a direct
effect on the placenta, as measured by the diagnosis of chronic nonspeciﬁc villitis.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.124

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.54]
PREVALENCE OF HYPERTENSIVE DISORDERS OF PREGNANCY (20042008) IN WESTERN RIO GRANDE DO NORTE, BRAZIL

[P3.55]
ADRP IS ASSOCIATED WITH FOAM CELLS AND ACUTE ATHEROSIS IN
DECIDUAL TISSUE

Priscila Silvana Bertevello*1, Ana Cristina Arrais2, Luiz Augusto Vieira
Cordeiro3, 1Rio Grande do Norte State University, Brazil, 2New Hope
Faculty, Brazil, 3Semiarid Federal University, Brazil

GM Johnsen*1,2, MS Weedon-Fekjaer2, M Sugulle1, HJ Kliman3, AC Staff1,4,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Oslo University Hospital,
Ulleval, Norway, 2Department of Nutrition, Institute of Basic Medical
Science, University of Oslo, Norway, 3Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine,
United States, 4Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway

Among the most common clinical complications in the pregnancy cycle is
the hypertension, classiﬁed as chronic hypertension, pre-eclampsia, preeclampsia on chronic hypertension, eclampsia and gestational hypertension. This work aims to investigate the prevalence of hypertensive disorders treated at emergency of the public health system in Mossoró, West
Rio Grande do Norte. It is a retrospective documental and epidemiological
research with a descriptive, qualitative and quantitative approach, and
using the technique of analysis of handbooks which have not received an
analytical treatment yet. The maternity hospital attended 19,120 women
who gave birth from January 2004 to December 2008. 6.5% of them (1,238
women) suffered from a hypertensive disorder, High Pressure Syndrome,
and 112 women (9%) presented eclampsia. 4.8% of neonates and only 3
parturients have died in 5 years. Among the parturients who presented
hypertension, 239 women (19%) gave birth to preterms, in which 60
stillbirths were conﬁrmed; 15 of these refer to pregnant teens and only 3
were over 40 years old. Fetal mortality rates in these age groups are not
consistent with the literature. In this casuistry, we highlight that 37% of
pregnant women were younger than 19 years old, in which 72% of the
women who suffered from hypertensive disorders were teenagers and 53%
presented eclamptic syndrome. Regarding the pregnant women with
admission to labor, the hospital documented that it was possible to
observe the high number of pregnant teenagers with hypertensive disorders. However, 78.2% of the pregnant teenagers in the hospital had their
gestation complete. 43.5% of all hypertensive parturient attended in the
hospital had less than 7 years of schooling. The results show that there is
a good quality service rendered to parturients during prenatal and
a concern to promote maternal and fetal health resulting in many quality
medical assistances, the establishment of the maternal immunization
program and the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of diseases intercurrent of pregnancy. The quality assistance allows the early perception of
risks. Moreover, we observed that most pregnant teenagers attended
during this period presented hypertensive disorder or exclusively
eclamptic one. Thus, it is clear the necessity of rendering greater assistance
to pregnant teenagers and search for the reasons why they are especially
affected by hypertensive disorders.
Keywords: pregnancy, preeclampsia, hypertensive disorders, prevalence

1

Acute atherosis of the maternal spiral arteries resembles the early stages of
atherosclerotic lesions, with areas of lipid deposition in the vessel walls,
characterized by subendothelial lipid-ﬁlled foam cells and ﬁbrinoid
necrosis. These foam cells are thought to derive from degenerated smooth
muscle cells and inﬁltrating CD68 positive macrophages. Oxidative stress
is regarded as a key factor in atherogenesis, and closely associated with
vessel wall inﬂammation and formation of bioactive lipids. In
preeclampsia, placental oxidative stress is associated with generalized
systemic inﬂammation and endothelial dysfunction and development of
maternal hypertension and proteinuria. Lipid droplets are intracellular
storage depots of triglycerides and cholesterol esters. ADRP is a lipid
droplet associated protein thought to be involved in the formation and
function of these droplets. ADRP is expressed in foam cells in vitro and
increase during foam cell formation, and ADRP mRNA is increased in
symptomatic carotid atherosclerosis. We hypothesized that ADRP and
other lipid droplet proteins could be involved in acute atherosis.
Decidual tissue was obtained from women with normal pregnancy (n¼30)
or preeclampsia (n¼27) during cesarean section and analyzed with realtime PCR. Decidual sections of 10 normal and 6 preeclamptic patients were
analyzed with immunohistochemistry.
ADRP was strongly expressed and localized to macrophages in areas of
lipid deposition within non-transformed spiral arteries. On the gene
expression level we did not ﬁnd any dysregulation of ADRP expression in
decidua in women with preeclampsia compared to normal pregnancies.
We propose that there are more macrophages and lipids in the nontransformed vessels in preeclampsia due to tissue injury because of the
alterations in the blood ﬂow to the placenta and subsequent oxidative
stress. The acute atherosis reduces vessel lumen and contribute to
placental infarcts and dysfunction and therefore we suggest that ADRP
could play a role in the clinical development of preeclampsia.
Keywords: Spiral arteries, Acute atherosis, Foam cells, Adipose differentiation related protein (ADRP)

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.125

[P3.56]
LIPID PEROXIDATION AND CA-ATPASE ACTIVITY IN SEVERAL ORGANS
FROM PREGNANT RATS CHRONICALLY DRINKING 1.8% NACL DURING
THE SECOND HALF OF THEIR PREGNANCY

[P3.58]
PERFUSION OF HUMAN PLACENTA WITH HEMOGLOBIN, INTRODUCES
PREECLAMPSIA-LIKE INJURIES THAT ARE PREVENTED BY
a1-MICROGLOBULIN

Desirée Botana*, Delia Chiarello, Raid Kamal et al, IVIC, Venezuela

K May2,1, L Rosenlöf3, M,G Olsson3, M Centlow1, M Mörgelin3, I Larsson1,
M Cederlund3, S Rutardottir3, H Schneider4, W Siegmund2, B Åkerström1,
S.R. Hansson*1 et al, 1Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of
Clinical Sciences, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, Sweden,
2
Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Ernst Moritz Arndt University of
Greifswald, Germany, Germany, 3Division of Infection Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, Sweden,
4
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Insel Spital, University of Bern,
Switzerland, Switzerland

Pregnant rats, chronically drinking 1.8% NaCl during the second half of
their pregnancy, develop hypertension, proteinuria, placental oxidative
stress and reduction in fetal size and weight. In a previous study, it was
found a rise in the level of lipid peroxidation (TBARS) and a diminution in
the activity of the Ca-ATPase of red cell ghosts and placenta homogenates
in the experimental pregnant rats (drinking 1.8% NaCl) as compared to
control rats (drinking tap water).
Objectives: To determine the Ca-ATPase activity and TBARS in homogenates of placenta, liver, brain, kidney, small intestine and heart from
pregnant rats drinking a solution of 1.8% NaCl during the second half of
their pregnancy.
Methods: Rats with 14 days of pregnancy were divided: a control group had
free access to tap water and a experimental group had access to a drinking
solution of 1.8% NaCl. After 21 days of pregnancy, the animals were killed
under anesthesia and several organs were removed and homogenized. The
homogenates were assayed for TBARS and Ca-ATPase activity.
Results: The homogenates of placenta, liver, brain, kidney, small intestine
and heart from the experimental pregnant rats show a rise in TBARS and
a disminution of the Ca-ATPase activity when compared with those from
control rats.
Conclusions: The pregnant rats drinking a solution of 1.8%NaCl during the
second half of their pregnancy show a rise in the level of lipid peroxidation
and a disminution of the Ca-ATPase activity for several organs: placenta,
liver, brain, kidney, intestine and heart.
Keywords: prengant rats, lipid peroxidation, homogenates placenta,
several organs
[P3.57]
EFFECT OF MAGNESIUM SULFATE ON THE THE NA,K-ATPASE ACTIVITY
IN PLASMA MEMBRANES OF HUMAN PLACENTAL EXPLANTS UNDER
HYPOXIA

Objectives: Preeclampsia (PE) is a major cause of fetal and maternal
morbidity and mortality. Preeclamptic women have increased plasma fetal
hemoglobin (HbF), increased placental HbF-expression and accumulation
of free HbF in the placental vascular lumen. Free hemoglobin (Hb) is proinﬂammatory and vasoconstrictive and its metabolites, heme and iron,
generates reactive oxygen species which cause cell and tissue damage. To
show the impact of free Hb in PE we used the dual ex vivo placental
perfusion model. The placentas were perfused with Hb and investigated
for physical parameters, Hb leakage, gene expression and morphology.
Furthermore, we investigated the protective effects, of a1-microglobulin
(A1M), a human heme- and radical-scavenger and antioxidant.
Findings: Hb-addition into the fetal circulation led to a signiﬁcant increase
of the perfusion pressure, feto-maternal leakage of free Hb, similar
morphological damages of as observed in PE placentas and up-regulation
of immune response- apoptosis- and oxidation-related genes. Simultaneous addition of A1M to the maternal circulation clearly inhibited the Hb
leakage, morphological damage and gene up-regulation. In addition, A1Maddition up-regulated extracellular matrix genes.
Conclusions: The ex vivo Hb-perfusion of human placenta resulted in
physiological and morphological changes and a gene expression proﬁle
similar to what is observed in PE placentas. This underlines the important
role of free Hb in PE etiology. The damaging effects were counteracted by
A1M, which we suggest as a new potential PE therapeutic agent.
Keywords: oxidativ stress, electron microscopy, microarray, therapeutics

Jessica Pernia*, Fulgencio Proverbio, Cilia Abad et al, IVIC, Venezuela
Since the beginning of the century, magnesium sulfate has been used,
along with antihypertensive drugs and rest, as a treatment for
preeclampsia. This clinical syndrome is detected after the 20th week of
gestation by the appearance of hypertension, proteinuria and edema. The
pathogenesis of preeclampsia indicates an abnormal invasion of the spiral
arteries, which causes a decrease in uteroplacental perfusion, and
a generalized endothelial dysfunction. Placental hypoxia promotes a lipid
peroxidation process which changes the composition of the plasma
membrane and consequently, affects the activity of membrane proteins,
such as the Na,K-ATPase. It has been reported a decrease in the activity of
this protein in microvillous and basal membranes of human placental
explants incubated under hypoxia conditions, and an increase in the levels
of their lipid peroxidation . On the other hand, the Na,K-ATPase activity and
the level of lipid peroxidation of plasma membranes from explants incubated under hypoxia in the presence of magnesium sulfate, show similar
values to those reported for membranes from explants incubated under
normoxia.
Objective: To determine the effect of the incubation with magnesium
sulfate on the activity of the Na,K-ATPase and the levels of membrane lipid
peroxidation of plasma membranes from human placental explants incubated under hypoxia conditions.
Results: The experimental membranes presented values of Na,K-ATPase
activity and lipid peroxidation levels similar to those reported for explants
incubated under normoxia.
Conclusions: Magnesium sulfate appears to be able to modify the lipidprotein interactions in the placental plasma membranes, recovering in this
way their values of Na,K- ATPase activity and levels of lipid peroxidation.
Keywords: Hypoxia, Placental Explants, Magnesium Sulfate, Na,K ATPase

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.126

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.59]
PRESENCE OF NON-FUNCTIONAL HCG IN PREECLAMPSIA AND RESCUE
OF NORMAL PREGNANCY BY RECOMBINANT HCG

[P3.60]
LPS INDUCES REMODELING OF TROPHOBLAST CELLS MEDIATED BY
MIR-155

S Kalkunte*1, T Navers1, W Norris1, P Banerjee1,2, A Fazleabas1,2, C Kuhn1,3
et al, 1Department of Pediatrics, Women and Infants Hospital-Alpert
Medical School of Brown University, United States, 2Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Michigan State University, United States,
3
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversity Munich, Germany

Hu Yali, Dai Yimin, Diao Zhenyu*, Wang Zhiqun, Sun Haixiang, Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Drum Tower Hospital, China

Objective: Pre-eclampsia (PE) is one of the most common complications of
pregnancy with an elusive etiology. Dysregulation in hormonal activity,
angiogenesis and immunity is considered to contribute to the onset of PE.
Although hCG is an early pregnancy hormone, we hypothesize that dysregulated hCG can lead to PE-like symptoms by affecting the trophoblast
functions, angiogenesis and uterine regulatory T cells. The objective of our
study was to establish a serum-based causal link between non-functional
hCG and PE using in vivo and in vitro models.
Method: hCG levels in serum from normal and PE patients were evaluated.
Glycosylation of hCG from normal and PE serum was determined by
a sandwich-ELISA. In vitro functional assays included serum-based MAPK
signalling and angiogenic cross-talk between the endothelial cells and
trophoblasts. Pregnant IL-10-/- mice were injected (gd 10, i.p) with either
normal pregnancy serum (NPS) or PE serum (PES) with or without
recombinant hCG (rhCG). On gd 16/17, blood pressure and pregnancy
outcome were recorded. Urinary albumin, creatinine, serum sFlt-1, sEng
were measured and renal pathology was monitored. On gd 12/13, splenic
and uterine Treg cells (CD4+CD25+FoxP3+) cells were monitored by FACS.
Results: Higher levels of hCG were observed in PES by ELISA. Glycosylation
pattern showed excessive presence of Sialyl-Lewis a (SLea), Sialyl-Lewis X
(SLeX) and Lewis Y (LeY) on PES hCG. Dysregulation of hCG signalling in
PES was demonstrated by defective ERK phosphorylation and disruption in
the dual cell angiogenesis which was reversible with rhCG. In vivo treatment with PES resulted in signiﬁcant reduction in Treg cells at the
maternal-fetal interface accompanied by IUGR, hypertension, proteinuria
and renal pathology, typical features of preeclampsia. This was reversed by
rhCG.
Conclusions: In vivo and in vitro assays indicate that dysregulated hCG
contributes to angiogenic defects, altered Treg cell density and PE-like
symptoms in mice.
Keywords: hCG, angiogenesis, regulatory T cells, preeclampsia

Background: Ultra-low dose of LPS injection has induced preeclampsia
model in rats. We investigated the alterations of trophoblast cells stimulated with different doses of LPS and explored the underlying mechanisms.
Methods: We detected two major subunits of AP-1, JunB and FosB and
micro RNA-155 in 20 severe preeclampsic and normal placentas as well as
the trophoblast cells treated in vitro with low/high dosage of LPS. We used
DNA precipitation assay and luciferase reporter analysis to evaluate the
regulation of miR-155 by AP-1 through recruitment to its binding sites
upstream of BIC/miR-155 gene promoter.
Results: Expression levels of miR-155, along with JunB and FosB showed
a signiﬁcant increase in severe preeclamptic placentas. Low dose of LPS
induced an upregulation of AP-1, which in turn enhanced the expression of
miR-155. Trophoblast cells enforced expression of miR-155 showed
a markedly reduced ability of migration and an increase of syncytiotrophoblast-like multinuclear cells. Anti-miR-155 potentially reversed the
above effects.
Conclusion: We identiﬁed an Ap-1 dependent upregulation of miR-155
following low dose LPS treatment of trophoblast cells. We also demonstrated roles of miR-155 in promoting trophoblastic synchronization and
inhibiting migration.
Key Words inﬂammation, AP-1, preeclampsia, migration, synchronization
[P3.61]
MICRO-RNA-PROFILES IN RESPONSE TO LIF IN TROPHOBLASTIC CELLS
DM Morales*, S Ospina, UR Markert, University Hospital Jena, Germany
Background: Micro-RNAs are recently detected key regulators of the
immune system and of carcinogenic processes, but their function in
pregnancy is poorly investigated yet. Leukemia Inhibitory Factor (LIF) is
a cytokine which plays a crucial role in trophoblastic cells and which
triggers their invasion via Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription
3 (STAT3). Therefore, we aimed to further analyze LIF induced signal
transduction and LIF-regulated micro-RNAs in two trophoblastic cell lines.
Material and Methods: JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells were stimulated with
LIF for 1 to 24 hours, and total mRNA was isolated. Phosphorylation of
signal transducers ERK1/2 (thr 702 and tyr 704) and STAT3 (ser 727 and tyr
705) was assessed by gel electrophoresis and Western blotting. STAT3 gene
expression was analyzed as control of induction by RT-PCR. Expression of
ﬁve different micro-RNAs, which are either known to be expressed in
placental tissue or involved in tumor invasion, was quantiﬁed at six time
points by qRT-PCR. Finally, by using a 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System
combined with TaqMan micro-RNA assay, the expression proﬁle of 760
micro-RNA was screened and compared in JEG-3 cells and HTR8/SVneo
immortalized ﬁrst trimester trophoblast cells stimulated or not with LIF for
4 hours.
Results: ERK1/2 and STAT3 were phosphorylated from 10 to 30 minutes
after LIF stimulation. Three out of ﬁve micro-RNA (miR-9, miR-141 and let7g) were time-dependently down-regulated by LIF with a peak after 4
hours of treatment, which correlates with an increase of STAT3 expression.
The micro-RNA proﬁling showed that expression of approximately 65% of
all micro-RNA was at least 10fold different in JEG-3 and HTR8/SVneo cells.
LIF inﬂuenced around 10% of all micro-RNA, but with little coincidence
between both cell lines.
Discusion: LIF modulates micro-RNA expression in trophoblastic cells, but
different cell lines behave diversely.
Keywords: trophoblast, choriocarcinoma, micro-RNA, LIF

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.62]
CHANGES IN OXYGEN TENSION MODIFY THE EXPRESSION OF NA+/H+
EXCHANGER TYPE 3 IN HUMAN PLACENTA
V Dietrich*1, A Reca1, C Rodriguez1, M Castro Parodi1, M Farina2,
AE Damiano1, 1Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2CEFyBO, Argentina
Transport of water, solutes and electrolytes between mother and fetus is
one of the most important functions of the human placenta. The syncytiotrophoblast is the site of exchange and since its syncytial nature the fetal
and maternal transport should take place primarily via transcellular
routes.
It is well known that in some pathological conditions such as
preeclampsia, the shallow trophoblast invasion and the poor remodelling
of the maternal spiral arteries result in an insufﬁcient uteroplacental
oxygenation. However, the assumption that the placental changes are
induced only by hypoxia may be simplistic. It has been proposed that
intermittent placental perfusion secondary to deﬁcient trophoblast invasion of the endometrial arteries leads to an ischemia-reperfusion [hypoxiareoxygenation] type insult. This insult may modify the expression and/or
the function of transport proteins and the placental pH homeostasis.
It was reported that the Na+/H+ exchanger (NHE) is expressed in human
placenta and may play a role in the maintenance of intercellular pH.
Recently, we described that isoform 3 of NHE (NHE-3) was reduced in
preeclamptic placentas. However, up to now placental NHE regulation
remains unclear.
The aim of our work was to establish if changes in oxygen concentration
may alter NHE-3 expression in human placenta.
Explants from normal placenta were cultured in normoxia, hypoxia, and in
hypoxia/reoxygenation. Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry
were performed to study NHE-3 expression.
We found that the expression of NHE-3 decreased when explants were
cultivated under hypoxic conditions and the posterior reoxygenation
treatment partially restored NHE-3 expression. In all cases, NHE-3 was
located in the apical membranes and in citoplasmatic regions.
These results suggest that changes in oxygen tension may modify NHE-3
expression in human placenta. Further studies are needed to evaluate if
this changes correlate with NHE-3 activity.
Keywords: hypoxia, syncytiotrophoblast, human placenta, Na+/H+
exchanger type 3

A.127

[P3.63]
POTASSIUM CHANNELS IN HUMAN PLACENTA FROM PREECLAMPTIC
AND IUGR PREGNANCIES: EXPRESSION, FUNCTION AND ASSOCIATION
TO LIPID RAFTS
N De Gregorio, C Vallejos, M Berrios, G Riquelme*, University of Chile, Chile
Human placental syncytiotrophoblast (hSTB) is an epithelium responsible
for materno-fetal exchange. Potassium conductances in placental
membranes have functions similar to other epithelial channels, such as the
resting potential of the hSTB microvillous membrane and are involved in
volume regulation processes. In pregnancy diseases as preeclampsia (PE)
and intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), the potassium channel activity
and consequently their inﬂuence on placental function could be modulated by their localization on specialized membrane domains and microdomains. Currently our aim is to identify the potassium channel channels
in apical membrane from IUGR and PE and to establish the targeting of
potassium channel subtypes (TREK, Kir, TASK and Kv) to raft and non raft
domains. METHODS: Puriﬁed microvillous membrane from PE and IUGR
hSTB was reconstituted into giant liposomes suitable for electrophysiological studies by the patch-clamp method. Microdomains (DRMs, detergent resistant membranes) were extracted from theses puriﬁed
membranes using 1%Triton X-100 and sucrose ﬂotation. Afterwards, we
collected the samples and probed them by Western blot. RESULTS: Our
data show an uneven expression of potassium channel subtypes in the
membrane fractions. All of them are expressed mainly (70%) in apical both
from normal and IUGR placentas. In contrast, the distribution in
membranes from PE showed a 60% of expression in the basal membrane.
Single channel recordings show the functional presence of K+ channels in
the hSTB microvillous membrane from PE and IUGR. However these
channels show a different sensitivity to blockers such as BaCl, MgCl2, TEA
and pH. Additionally, the single channels conductances are altered
compared with potassium channel reported previously in normal
placentas. Furthermore some of them have a different localization within
the membrane microdomains. Kir and Task-1 but not TREK and Kv, target
a specialized cholesterol rich lipid raft domains. Conclusion: The
membrane compartmentalization of potassium channels and their
biophysical characteristics may be critical to understand the molecular
mechanism of transport processes that occur in the placental hSTB from
normal and pathological pregnancies. Supported by FONDECYT 1070695
(Chile).
Keywords: POTASSIUM CHANNELS, PREECLAMPTIC, IUGR

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.128

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.64]
CHLORIDE CHANNELS IN HUMAN SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST APICAL AND
BASAL MEMBRANE FROM PREECLAMPTIC AND IUGR PREGNANCIES

[P3.65]
CHRONIC BUT NOT ACUTE EXPOSURE TO EPIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR
INCREASES SYSTEM A AMINO ACID TRANSPORT IN PLACENTAL
EXPLANTS

C Vallejos, B Morales, G Madrid, G Riquelme*, University of Chile, Chile
Chloride transport involving conductive pathways is associated to
numerous epithelial functions such as maintenance of membrane voltage,
solute transport and cell volume regulation. There is evidence that transepithelial chloride transport in placental syncytiotrophoblast may also be
involved in such functions. Alterations in the activity of these channels
associated with pathologies of pregnancy as preeclampsia and IUGR could
involve alterations in these functions. We have previously studied a Maxi
chloride channel in apical membranes from normal and Preeclamptic
placentas. This channel has changes in its conductance and kinetics in this
pathology. Our current aims are to characterize the Maxi chloride channel
in apical membrane from IUGR and determine the presence of functional
chloride ion channels in the human placental STB
Methods: Puriﬁed basal membranes from human placental STB were
reconstituted into giant liposomes suitable for single-channel recordings
by the patch-clamp technique, or were transplanted into Xenopus laevis
oocytes for voltage-clamp total current recordings.
Results: Exogenous currents of chloride were detected in oocytes transplanted with STB apical membrane from IUGR placentas. Additionally in
the last, single-channel experiments show two frequent conductance
states of approximately 160 and 90 pS in contrast to the 240pS obtained for
the conductance of normal placenta. Similar experiments with normal
basal membrane show the presence of three types of chloride conductances: a high conductance of 220 pS, a medium conductance of 170 pS,
and a low conductance of 50 pS with different sensitivities to two classical
chloride channels blockers: DIDS (4,40 -diisothiocyanatostilbene-2,20 disulphonic acid) and DPC (diphenylamine-2-carboxylate). In the same
way, in basal membrane from PE and IUGR we have obtained three populations of chloride channels, however, the conductances are smaller than
the values for normal placentas.
Conclusion: To identify the functional differences of chloride channels in
these pathologies is important to understand the role of these channels in
health and disease-. Supported by FONDECYT 1070695 (Chile).
Keywords: CHLORIDE CHANNELS, HUMAN SYNCYTIOTROPHOBLAST,
PREECLAMPTIC, IUGR

AEP Heazell*, L Hopkins, SP Drake, SVC Hill, CJP Jones, CP Sibley et al,
Maternal and Fetal Health Research Centre, University of Manchester,
United Kingdom
Introduction: Fetal growth restriction (FGR) is associated with altered cell
turnover and decreased activity of the system A amino acid transporter in
villous trophoblast. Growth factors represent a means of manipulating
trophoblast renewal and function, and may represent a novel therapeutic
approach to FGR.
Objective: To investigate whether treatment with epidermal growth factor
(EGF) enhances placental function following acute (2h) or chronic (96h)
exposure.
Methods: Villous explants were taken from normal term placentas (n¼8)
and cultured with or without 100ng/ml EGF for 2h or 96h at 6% O2.
Following treatment, the activity of system A was assessed by Na+dependent uptake of 14C-methyl-aminoisobutyric acid. After 96 hours,
culture media was assayed for human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) and
cell turnover was quantiﬁed by immunostaining for cytokeratin M30
(apoptosis) and Ki67 (proliferation). Morphology was assessed on semithin sections.
Results: Treatment with EGF for 2h did not alter system A activity (median
at 90 minutes [IQR], 297.5 [88.6-437.5] vs. 263 [165-372.5] pmol/mg
protein/min). However, system A activity was increased by EGF treatment
in 96h cultured explants (median at 90 minutes 221.5 [183.1-232.5] vs.
177.0 [146.5-232.8] pmol/mg protein/min, p<0.05). There was no signiﬁcant change in apoptosis following EGF treatment (median apoptotic index
EGF 0.48 [0.28-1.60] vs. control 0.35 [0.12-1.53]). Trophoblast proliferation
also was not altered by EGF (median proliferative index EGF 1.59 [0.952.33] vs. control 1.37 [0.74-1.97]). Morphological differentiation of the
trophoblast layer was more pronounced following treatment with EGF, but
hCG secretion was not altered.
Conclusion: Chronic exposure to EGF increases activity of the system A
transporter. At 6% oxygen, this does not appear to be directly related to
altered cell turnover. Further work is necessary to determine the mode of
action of EGF and whether system A transport can be restored in pregnancies complicated by FGR.
Funded by the Peel Medical Research Trust
Keywords: Epidermal Growth Factor, System A transport, Placental
explants

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.129

[P3.66]
ACTIVITY AND EXPRESSION OF HUMAN EQUILIBRATIVE NUCLEOSIDE
TRANSPORTER 1 IS REGULATED BY D-GLUCOSE UPTAKE AND METABOLISM IN UMBILICAL VEIN ENDOTHELIUM

[P3.67]
ADENOVIRAL-MEDIATED PLACENTAL GENE TRANSFER OF IGF-1
CORRECTS PLACENTAL INSUFFICIENCY VIA ENHANCED PLACENTAL
NUTRIENT TRANSPORT MECHANISMS

C Puebla*, P Casanello, L Sobrevia, Cellular and Molecular Physiology
Laboratory (CMPL) & Perinatology Research Laboratory (PRL), Division of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Research Centre (CIM), School of
Medicine, Pontiﬁcia Unive, Chile

HN Jones*, J Chung, F-Y Lim, SG Keswani, TM Crombleholme, MA Habli,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, United States

In human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) adenosine uptake is
mainly mediated by human equilibrative nucleoside transporters 1
(hENT1). High extracellular D-glucose reduces hENT1 expression and
activity in this cell type. HUVEC express functional facilitative D-glucose
transporters (GLUTs), but the role of D-glucose transport and metabolism
on the modulation of hENT1 is unknown. We studied whether D-glucose
transport and metabolism modulates hENT1 expression and activity in
HUVEC.
Methods: Conﬂuent HUVEC were exposed (24 hours) to 5 mM (normal) or
25 mM (high) D-glucose in absence or presence (3-24 hours) of phloretin
(GLUTs inhibitor, 100 mM) or sodium iodoacetate [glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) inhibitor, 1 mM]. Adenosine uptake
(10 mM, 2 mCi/ml, 20 s, 22 C) was then measured in absence or presence of
nitrobenziltioinosine (NBTI, 1 mM, ENT1 inhibitor). 2-Deoxi-D-[3H]glucose
(2DG) uptake (1.6 mM 2-Deoxi-D-glucose, 3 mCi/ml, 5-40 s, 22 C) was
measured in absence or presence of phloretin. hENT1 mRNA level and
protein abundance were evaluated by RT-PCR and western blot,
respectively.
Results: hENT1-adenosine uptake, hENT1 protein abundance and mRNA
level were reduced (40  12%, 43  12% and 29  3%, respectively; P<0.05,
two way ANOVA test) in cells exposed to 25 mM compared with 5 mM
D-glucose. Coincubation of cells with phloretin or sodium iodoacetate
blocked the effects of 25 mM D-glucose on hENT1-mediated transport, but
these inhibitors did not alter these parameters in cells in 5 mM D-glucose.
Parallel results show inhibition of 2DG uptake by phloretin in 5 and 25 mM
D-glucose.
Conclusion: The reduced activity and expression of hENT1 by high
D-glucose is a phenomenon that will depend on D-glucose transport and
may require D-glucose metabolism via GAPDH in HUVEC.
Supported by CONICYT ACT-73 (PIA) & AT-24090190, FONDECYT 1070865
& 1080534, Chile. C.P. holds a CONICYT-PhD fellowship.
Keywords: High Glucose, Nucleoside Transporter, Endothelial cells,
Glucose Metabolism

Previous work in our laboratory demonstrated that over-expression of
human insulin-like growth factor -1 (hIGF-1) in the placenta corrects fetal
weight deﬁcits in mouse, rat, and rabbit models of intrauterine growth
restriction without changes in placental weight. The underlying mechanisms of this effect have not been elucidated. To investigate the effect of
intra-placental IGF-1 over-expression on placental function we examined
native murine placental IGF-1 levels and nutrient transporter expression
in a mouse model of IUGR.
Methods: At gestational day 18, animals were divided into four groups;
sham-operated controls, mesenteric uterine artery ligation (MUAL), MUAL
+ Ad-hIGF-1 (MUAL+IGF,108 PFU), MUAL + Ad-LacZ (108 PFU). At gestational day 20, pups and placentas were harvested by C-section and
maternal blood samples collected by cardiac puncture. Human IGF-1 and
mouse IGF-1 levels were analyzed by ELISA. The RNA expression of amino
acid transporters from System A (SNAT 1,2,4) and System L (LAT1,2 and
4F2hc) and glucose transporters GLUT1 and GLUT3 were analyzed by
qPCR.
Results: Only the MUAL+ hIGF-1 placentas showed expression of human
IGF-1 by ELISA (27.4ng/mg,n¼5), no human IGF-1 was detectable in
maternal serum. Endogenous mouse IGF-1 levels were not different in
placenta or maternal serum between treatments. SNAT2 RNA expression
was reduced by 30% (p<0.01,n>3) in the MUAL group compared to sham,
but returned to sham levels with Ad-hIGF-1 treatment. Ad-LacZ treatment
did not lead to a recovery in SNAT2 RNA expression. GLUT1 expression was
reduced by 30% (p¼0.01,n3) in all treatment groups compared to sham.
There were no other differences in transporter expression between groups.
Conclusion: These changes demonstrate that mesenteric uterine artery
ligation results in signiﬁcant reduction in SNAT2 and GLUT1 expression.
IGF-1 over-expression enhances placental amino acid but not glucose
transport. This enhanced transport gene expression may be an important
mechanism in IGF-1mediated correction of placental insufﬁciency.
Keywords: IUGR, Mouse, amino acid transport

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.130

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.68]
LITHIUM INHIBITS CATION TRANSPORT IN THE TRP CHANNEL POLYCYSTIN-2 (TRPP2)

[P3.69]
PHOSPHOLIPID TRANSFER PROTEIN IS EXPRESSED AND ACTIVE IN
HUMAN PLACENTAL ENDOTHELIAL CELLS

MdR Cantero*1, HF Cantiello1,2, 1Laboratorio de Canales Iónicos. CONICET,
Argentina, 2Nephrology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, United
States

M Scholler*1, I Lang3, I Björkhem4, C Wadsack2, G Desoye2, U Panzenboeck1
et al, 1Institute of Pathophysiology, Medical University Graz, Austria,
2
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University Graz,
Austria, 3Institute of Cell Biology, Histology & Embryology, Medical
University Graz, Austria, 4Dept Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Sweden

Introduction: Lithium (Li+) is a potent pharmaceutical agent that has
a profound effect in the treatment of bipolar affective disorder and mania.
Although Li+ is not devoid of prenatal safety concerns, and its use during
lactation has been widely discouraged, it continues to be favoured by many
clinicians for use during pregnancy. Nevertheless, Li+ use during late
pregnancy is associated with particular clinical concerns that have not
been investigated. Numerous reports of neonatal complications have been
associated with Li+ treatment during late pregnancy, including cardiac
dysfunction, diabetes insipidus, hypothyroidism and low muscle tone.
Polycystin–2 (PC2) is a TRP-type, non-selective cation channel that
permeates Ca2+ and is abundantly expressed in term human syncytiotrophoblast. We have postulated that based on its biophysical properties
and regulatory mechanisms, PC2 may be an important contributor to Ca2+
delivery from the mother to the foetus. Herein, we explored the effect of Li+
on PC2 channel function.
Methods: Both in vitro translated and human syncytiotrophoblast PC2
were assessed for permeability to Li+. Lipid bilayer reconstituted PC2 in the
presence of either a K+ chemical gradient (150/15 mM) and increasing
concentrations of Li+, or different symmetrical concentrations of either ion.
RESULTS: A decreased in the single channel conductance, and changes in
reversal potential of the current-to-voltage relationships in the presence of
Li+, consistent with both, permeability to, and a blocking effect of, Li+ on
PC2 channel function was observed. The single channel conductance in
asymmetrical K+ was 160 pS, and 115 pS in asymmetrical Li+. Calculations
of the reversal potentials of the ﬁtted data with the Goldman-HodgkinKatz equation indicated a K+/Li+ perm-selectivity ratio of 1.5-2.0.
Conclusions: The data were in agreement with anomalous mole-fraction
properties of PC2, and the possibility that Li+ blockage of PC2 may impair
cation transport, particularly Ca2+ in the human placenta.
Keywords: Polycystin-2, lithium, term human syncytiotrophoblast

Objectives: Phospholipid transfer protein (PLTP) plays a crucial role in
lipoprotein metabolism. It is regulated by liver X (LXR) nuclear receptors
which can be activated by oxysterols. Reports on high PLTP mRNA
expression levels in human placenta strongly imply a role of PLTP in the
placenta. This together with the important role of HDL and LXR regulation
in maternal-fetal cholesterol transfer across placental endothelial cells
prompted us to investigate PLTP at the feto-placental endothelial barrier.
Methods: PLTP was localised by immunohistochemistry. Its mRNA and
protein expression levels in isolated human arterial and venous fetal term
placental endothelial cells (HPEC) were analyzed by real-time PCR and
immunoblotting, respectively. PLTP activity in supernatants of cultured
HPEC and fetal human hepatic (WRL-68) cells was determined using
a radiometric assay. PLTP expression and activity were measured after
treatment with the LXR agonists 24(S)- and 27-hydroxycholesterol.
Results: In placenta, PLTP was located in endothelial cells. Both, arterial
and venous HPEC express and secrete active PLTP but mRNA expression
(3.4 x, p < 0.05) and phospholipid transfer activity in supernatants of
arterial HPEC was greater (96 %, p < 0.001) as compared to venous HPEC.
LXR activation by 24(S)OH cholesterol, which represents the major enzymatic produced oxysterol in the fetal circulation, upregulated PLTP mRNA
expression (77 %, p < 0.01) in arterial HPEC concomitantly with increased
PL transfer activity in cellular supernatants (40 %, p < 0.05). Even though
mRNA expression in fetal human liver cells was signiﬁcantly higher, PLTP
secreted by arterial HPEC showed a greater phospholipid transfer activity.
Conclusion: Placental endothelial cells, arterial more than venous,
contribute to the release of active PLTP into the fetal circulation which can
be inﬂuenced by LXR activation. PLTP may mediate PL transfer and
participate in reverse cholesterol transport pathways at the feto-placental
barrier.
Keywords: phospholipid transfer protein, human placental endothelial
cells, 24(S)-hydroxycholesterol

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.131

[P3.70]
TRAFFICKING OF MMP-9 THROUGH AMNIOCHORION IS ASSOCIATED TO
TERM HUMAN GESTATION

[P3.71]
INDUCTION OF
TROPHOBLAST

M Castillo-Castrejón*, N Meraz-Cruz, F Vadillo-Ortega, UNAM, Mexico

AN Sharp1, AEP Heazell*1, PN Baker2, IP Crocker1, 1University of Manchester, United Kingdom, 2University of Alberta, Canada

Rupture of the fetal membranes (FM) during human labor is associated
with a highly controlled local inﬂammatory response. Several leukocytes
subsets are recruited to the choriodecidua, once delivery is approaching
these cells participate in the conditioning of the local microenvironment
through the secretion of inﬂammatory signals and mediators of membrane
rupture. Leukocytes are the main source of MMP-9, which is involved in
the degradation of connective tissue, the major structural component of
the FM and responsible of their tensile strength during gestation. Since the
major substrate of MMP-9 is in the amnion side, it is expected that a trafﬁcking mechanism that allows MMP-9 to transit across amniochorion
must exist.
The aim of this study was to analyze the transport of proMMP-9 through
human amniochorion.
Methods: FM were collected from caesarean sections and mounted in an in
vitro model, which allowed us to maintain their anatomical relationships.
Labelled human recombinant proMMP-9 was added to the choriodecidua
side and incubated at different times. Frozen sections were obtained and
analyzed by confocal laser scanning microscopy for location of pro-MMP-9.
Labelled BSA was used as a control.
Results: proMMP-9 was localized in the amniotic epithelium after 3 hours
and until 24 hours of incubation. An unexpected ﬁnding was that proMMP9 was found as intracellular dense granular deposits. We demonstrated the
presence of entire, functional MMP-9 in the interior of these cells. There
was no evidence of transport when albumin was added.
Conclusions: MMP-9 can be speciﬁcally trafﬁcked trough the chorioamnion when added to the choriodecidual side in FM obtained from
women near to term gestation. MMP-9 is stored as intracitoplasmic
granules, which may be related to formation of macromolecular complexes
that can be unassembled at the moment of labor, liberating massive
amounts of MMP-9, provoking the rupture of the FM during late phases of
normal labor.
Keywords: MMP-9, Fetal Membranes, Transport, Human gestation

P53

PROMOTES

APOPTOSIS

IN

THE

VILLOUS

Introduction: The villous placenta in preeclampsia and IUGR is characterised by exaggerated trophoblast turnover, apoptosis and exaggerated
expression of p53. Previously we have demonstrated that both apoptosis
and p53 expression is exaggerated in vitro by treatment with the p53
activator Nutlin-3. In cell lines we have demonstrated that Nutlin-3
induces apoptosis, which is reduced by co-treatment with the p53 inhibitor Piﬁthrin-a. We present studies of the effect of p53 modulation in the
human villous explant model.
Methods: Villous fragments from term placentas were cultured in 6%
oxygen for 48hrs before exposure to 30mM Nutlin-3 or 30mM Nutlin-3 and
10mM Piﬁthrin-a in combination for a further 48hrs. Explants were wax
embedded for immunohistochemistry or homogenised for protein.
Trophoblast apoptosis was assessed by M30 and TUNEL staining and by
activity of caspase-3/7. Proliferation was assessed by Ki67 staining.
Results: Treatment with Nutlin-3 resulted in an increase in M30 staining
(p<0.0079, Mann-Whitney, n¼5) and TUNEL positivity (p<0.0079,
Mann-Whitney, n¼5). This increase in M30 was reduced by co-treatment
with Piﬁthrin-a (p<0.0079, Mann-Whitney, n¼5) and TUNEL (p<0.0317,
Mann-Whitney, n¼5). However, there was no difference in caspase-3/7
activity. Proliferation was reduced between fresh villous tissue and Nutlin3 treated tissue but not control or combination treatment (p<0.0317,
Mann-Whitney, n¼5).
Discussion: Using the villous explant model we demonstrate that treatment with Nutlin-3 induces apoptosis in trophoblast, an effect which is
reduced by co-treatment with Pifthrin-a. Our data suggest that the main
effect of Nutlin-3 treatment may be upon the syncytiotrophoblast with
protection of the stroma, as suggested by the lack of effect upon caspase-3/
7 from whole villous tissue. These studies suggest that the p53 pathway
may be a suitable target for future therapies in placental pathologies.
Keywords: p53, apoptosis, trophoblast

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.132

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.72]
AUTOPHAGY IN NORMAL HUMAN TERM PLACENTAS
E Virgili, P Signorelli, L Avagliano, R Ghidoni, G Bulfamante, AM Marconi*,
University of Milano, Italy
Introduction: Cell strategy under stress is to slow down metabolism and
decrease proliferation rate by triggering autophagy, which represents the
autodigestion of redundant proteins and organels, limiting cell demand
and prolonging survival. Autophagy has been detected in the human
placenta but it is not known whether it is triggered to sustain cell survival
or it is switched on in severe stress conditions leading to cell death. The
aim of our study was to study the presence of autophagy in normal term
placentas.
Methods: 14 placentas were collected at the time of term uncomplicated
vaginal delivery (VD; n¼7) and elective caesarean section (CS; n¼7) after
uneventful pregnancies with singleton liveborn healthy infants with
appropriate birthweight.
Autophagy detection: LC3 (autophagy marker) was evaluated by immunoblotting from frozen tissues and by immunoistochemistry of formalinﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded tissue section (antibody from Novus, Biologicals,
Littleton, CO, USA).
Biochemical analyses Umbilical blood gases, pH, glucose and hemoglobin
concentrations were measured with a Radiometer ABL 330 Analyzer.
Results: Western Blotting
LC3II (cleaved product of LC3, associated to late autophagosomes) was
signiﬁcantly higher [p<0.05] in CS than VD placentas [Figure 1].

[P3.73]
ASSOCIATION OF
PREECLAMPSIA

APOPTOTIC

GENETIC

POLYMORPHISMS

AND

S Daher*, KPT Pendeloski, R Mattar, MR Torloni, N Sass, AF Moron, SAO
PAULO FEDERAL UNIVERSITY, Brazil
Introduction: Alterations in apoptosis mechanisms in trophoblastic cells
are involved in the physiopathology of preeclampsia (PE) and the FAS/FASL
complex seems to play an important role. Polymorphisms in FAS and FASL
gene promoter regions may alter the expression of these molecules. Our
aim was to investigate a possible association between FAS (-670) and FASL
(-844) gene polymorphisms and PE.
Methods: This case-control study included 130 preeclamptic patients and
260 normotensive women without any obstetric or systemic pathology as
controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood, and polymorphism genotyping were obtained by digesting PCR products with the
following restriction endonucleases: BstNI (FAS) and BsrDI (FASL). Results
were analyzed by chi-square and Fischer exact tests, with signiﬁcance set
at p<0.05.
Results: Genotypic frequencies of FAS polymorphism were 34.9% GG and
65% GA+AA in the PE group; and 24.5% GG and 75.5% GA+AA in controls
(p¼0.03). Genotypic frequencies of FASL were 33.8% CC and 66.1% TC+TT in
the PE group; and 20% CC and 80% TC+CC in controls (p¼0.004).
Conclusion: This study suggests that FAS (-670) and FASL (-844) gene
polymorphisms are associated with the risk of developing PE in a Brazilian
population.
Finnancial support : CNPq, CAPES, FAPESP (# 07/57446-0).
Keywords: preeclampsia, apoptosis, gene polymorphism, Fas-Fas-L
complex

Ă

Immunohistochemistry
LC3 immunostaining was observed in all cases, in the villous trophoblast,
with no differences between VD and CS.
Biochemical analyses
No difference was present with the exception of glucose concentration that
was lower in CS than in VD.
Conclusion: Autophagy is present in normal term placentas. Whereas
uncomplicated labor is well sustained by the healthy placenta which
tolerates the intermittent stress of contractions, the placenta at surgery
exhibits a higher level of autophagy in association with lower blood
glucose concentrations. We speculate that mechanisms alternating muscle
and vasal constriction, such as in labor, may actually cause a burst in cell
metabolism whereas autophagy represents a response to prolonged stress
such as low glucose supply or surgery.
Keywords: Autophagy, Placenta, Human pregnancy

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.133

[P3.74]
THE EFFECT OF HOMOCYSTEINE ON TRANSSULFURATION PATHWAY,
PROLIFERATION AND APOPTOSIS IN HUMAN PLACENTA

[P3.75]
FETAL ACTIVATION OF PPAR: METABOLIC EFFECTS IN THE FETAL LIVER
AND THE PLACENTA

M. Obolenskaya*1, O. Martesenyuk1, C. Mislanova2, R. Romanets1, B. Huppertz3, 1Institute of Molecualr Biology and genetics national Academy of
Sciences if Ukraine, Ukraine, 2Slovak Medical University, Slovakia, 3Medical
University of Graz, Austria

Nora Alicia Martínez*, Melisa Kurtz, Verónica White, Alicia Jawerbaum,
Laboratory of Reproduction and Metabolism, CEFYBO-CONICET, School of
Medicine, University of Buenos Aires, Argentina

Introduction: Homocysteine (Hcy), a thiol-containing amino acid, is situated at the cross point of two metabolic processes from where it follows
either remethylation or inverse catabolism while synthesis of cysteine
(Cys). Impairment of Hcy metabolism provokes hyperhomocysteinemia
with characteristic pathologies particularly developmental defects of the
fetus, and other complications of pregnancy, e.g. preeclampsia, still birth
etc.
Taking into account the substantial role of placental metabolism in the
initiation of obstetrical pathology the goal of our study was to explore the
effect of HCy on transsulfuration pathway, proliferation and apoptosis in
human placenta.
Methods: The placental samples and explants from the I and the III
trimesters of gestation were used in the study. The expression of key
enzymes of transsulfuration pathway, cystathionine b-synthase (CBS) and
cystathionine g-lyase (CSE), was detected by RT-PCR, Western blot analysis; CBS localization – by immunochistochemical approach; CBS catalytic
activity – by radioactive assay; Cys concentration - by HPLC conjugated
with coulochmical detector and proliferation and apoptosis - by immunochemical procedure with antibodies to Ki67 and M30 antigens,
respectively.
Results: The expression of CBS and CSE in placental samples from the I and
the III trimesters of gestation were conﬁrmed at RNA and protein levels,
CBS catalytic activity - by positive conversion of serine and Hcy to cystathionine, and CBS protein was localized in syncythio- and cytotrophoblast. Treatment of explants from both terms of gestation by 20, 40 and 80
mM of Hcy induced the concentration dependent decrease of proliferation
index and increase of apoptotic index. The rate of changes in apoptotic
index in the explants from both terms of gestation exceeds that of proliferation index. The apoptotic index in term explants is 5-6 times higher
than in explants from the I trimester of gestation. Elevated concentrations
of Hcy stimulate the expression of CBS and Cys synthesis.
Conclusion: Elevated concentrations of Hcy infringe the vital processes
(proliferationa and apoptosis) ensuring normal placental function and
promote accumulation of CBS protein and Cys.
Keywords: Homocysteine, Transsulfuration, Proliferation, Apoptosis

Introduction: Maternal diabetes induces alterations in lipid and nitric
oxide (NO) metabolism and affects feto-placental development and
growth. PPARa is a nuclear receptor involved in lipid homeostasis in
different tissues.
Objective: To analyze whether fetal PPARa activation regulates lipid and
NO metabolism in the placenta and fetal liver from diabetic rats, and to
study the involvement of this activation in the feto-placental growth.
Methods: Diabetes was induced by neonatal streptozotocin administration. Fetuses from control and diabetic rats were injected through the
uterine wall with the PPARa agonist leukotriene B4 (LTB4, 0.1mM) on days
19, 20, and 21 of gestation. On day 21 of gestation, placental and fetal liver
concentrations of lipids, lipoperoxides and NO were evaluated.
Results: Placentas, fetuses and fetal livers from diabetic rats showed
increased weight (p<0.05). In diabetic animals, overaccumulation of
triglycerides and cholesteryl esters was observed in the fetal liver
(p<0.05), an increase in lipid peroxidation was observed in both the
placenta and the fetal liver (p<0.01), and an increase in NO production was
observed in the fetal liver.
In diabetic animals, fetal treatment with LTB4 reduced the placental, fetal
and fetal liver weight (p<0.05). This fetal treatment reduced the concentrations of triglycerides, cholesteryl esters and phospholipids (p<0.05), as
well as lipid peroxidation, and NO production in the fetal liver (p<0.01). In
addition, it reduced NO production (p<0.05) but did not alter lipid
concentrations in the placenta.
Conclusions: Our results provide evidence of a fetal role of PPARa activation in the regulation of both lipid homeostasis in the fetal liver and NO
production in the fetal liver and the placenta, with an overall impact on
fetal and placental growth.
Keywords: Diabetes, Fetal Liver, Placenta, lipids

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.134

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.76]
SIGNAL TRANSDUCER AND ACTIVATOR OF TRANSCRIPTION 5 (STAT5)
SIGNALING IN TROPHOBLASTIC CELLS IS INDUCED BY EPIDERMAL
GROWTH FACTOR (EGF)
S Ospina*, DM Morales, UR Markert, University Hospital Jena, Germany
Background: Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) displays mannifold functions
in the placenta including tuning of invasion. Recent reports have demonstrated that activation of Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription
(STAT) proteins, including STAT3 and STAT5 actively participate in tumor
development and progression. STAT5 is an intracellular protein downstream tyrosine-kinase receptors, which stimulates proliferation and cell
cycle progression. Several cytokines involved in the regulation of trophoblast behaviour have been shown to mediate their effects though STAT3,
but less is known about STAT5 activation in pregnancy. The aim of this
study was to assess correlation of STAT5 and STAT3 phosphorylation.
Materials and Methods: JAR, BeWo and JEG3 choriocarcinoma cells as
well as HTR-8/SVneo immortalized trophoblast cells were stimulated with
IL-2, IL-11, Leukemia Inhibitory Factor (LIF), Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF)
or Granulocyte Macrophage-Colony Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF) by
applying diverse concentrations and times. The effect of the cytokines and
growth factors on the expression, phosphorylation and localization of
STATs were determined by Western blotting and immunocytochemistry.
Results: Only EGF induces STAT5 phosphorylation (Tyr 694) in all analyzed
cell lines, while the other cytokines, except IL2, induce different intensity
of STAT3 phosphorylation (tyr 705) depending on cytokine and cell line.
Discussion: It can be concluded that cytokines that activate STAT3 and
STAT5 in trophoblastic cells are different. The activating cytokines are
highly expressed in the placenta. Therefore, it can be assumed that
simultaneous activation occurs frequently and may further inﬂuence
functions and behaviour of cells.
Keywords: trophoblast, STAT5, EGF, STAT3

[P3.77]
PLACENTAL IGF2 SIGNALLING PLAYS A MAJOR ROLE IN THE FETOPLACENTAL RESPONSE TO UNDERNUTRITION IN MICE
AN Sferruzzi-Perri*, OR Vaughan, PM Coan, M Constancia, GJ Burton, AL
Fowden, Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, United
Kingdom
During maternal undernutrition, the placenta adapts morphologically and
functionally to maintain fetal growth, despite its small size. In part, these
adaptations may be due to reduced expression of the placental-speciﬁc P0
transcript of the paternally expressed Igf2 gene and alterations in its
growth promoting signalling pathway.
Aim: To determine the role of placental Igf2 signalling in the fetal and
placental response to maternal calorie-restriction.
Methods: Wildtype (WT) females were mated with WT or Igf2P0 -/+ males
to generate homozygous WT and Igf2P0 -/+ litters. Females were fed either
control diet ad libitium (CT) or 80% of the control intake (UN) during
pregnancy. After euthanasia on D19, the placenta next closest to the mean
per litter was frozen for analysis of protein abundance by western blotting
(n¼4-5 litters per group). Differences between groups were considered
signiﬁcant if P<0.05.
Results: In WT placentas, UN increased the abundance of IGF type 1
receptor (IGF1R) and reduced the p85a subunit of PI3K, active AKT
(phosphorylated at S473 and T308) and the activity of AKT's targets,
p70S6K and glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3b (P<0.05, all cases). The
placental expression proﬁle of IGF2 downstream signalling proteins was
similar in CTIgf2P0 and UNWT. In Igf2P0 placentas, UN had no effect on
expression of IGF1R or p85a but increased phosphorylation of AKT (S473)
and GSK3b. Fetal and placental weights were reduced in UNWT and
CTIgf2P0 relative to CTWT. UN reduced fetal but not placental weight in
Igf2P0 litters compared with CTIgf2P0.
Conclusions: Dietary restriction produced a different signalling phenotype
in WT and Igf2P0 placentas. Signalling in the CTIgf2P0 placenta resembled
that of the UNWT, whilst UNIgf2P0 was similar to CTWT. This suggests that
the Igf2P0 placenta maybe receiving appropriate nutrition for its small size
in the UN state. Furthermore, the placental-speciﬁc Igf2P0 transcript plays
a major role in the placental response to maternal undernutrition.
Keywords: insulin-like growth factor, nutrition, AKT (protein kinase B)

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

A.135

[P3.78]
LEPTIN INCREASES PROTEIN SYNTHESIS IN TROPHOBLASTIC CELLS BY
ACTIVATING MAPK AND PI3K PATHWAYS

[P3.79]
INVESTIGATING
TRANSPLACENTAL
SIGNALLING
MECHANISMS
PRODUCED FROM TROPHOBLASTIC TISSUE INVOLVED IN DNA DAMAGE

A. Pérez-Pérez1, J.L. Maymó2, Y.P. Gambino2, J.L. Dueñas1, C.L. Varone2,
V. Sánchez-Margalet*1, 1Virgen Macarena University Hospital, Spain,
2
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad, Argentina

C.A Burden*1, S.R Grant1, C.P Case2, A Sood2, S Salif2, 1Department of
Obstetrics Southmead Hospital,Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Bristol Implant
Research Centre,Southmead Hospital,Bristol, United Kingdom

Leptin, the Ob gene product is produced in placenta where it may work as
an autocrine hormone, mediating growth, angiogenesis and immune
modulation. In fact, leptin receptor (LEPR, also known as Ob-R) is
expressed in placenta, and leptin seems to be be an important autocrine
signal for trophoblastic growth during pregnancy. Thus, we have recently
described the antiapoptotic and trophic effect of leptin on choriocarcinoma cell line JEG-3, stimulating DNA and protein synthesis. We have also
demonstrated the presence of leptin receptor and leptin signaling in
normal human trophoblastic cells, activating JAK-STAT, PI3K and MAPK
pathways.
In the present work we have employed dominant negative forms of MAPK
and PKB constructs, as well as pharmacological inhibitors of MEK and PI3K
to ﬁnd out the signaling pathways that speciﬁcally mediates the effect of
leptin on protein synthesis. As previously shown, leptin stimulates protein
synthesis as assessed by 3H-leucine incorporation. However, the inhibition
of MAPK and PI3K pathways by using both dominant negative forms of
MAPK and PKB, or by blocking PI3K and MEK activation by using pharmacological inhibitors prevented the leptin stimulation of protein
synthesis in JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells. The inhibition of both pathways
also prevented the leptin stimulation of p70 S6K, which is known to be an
important kinase in the regulation of protein synthesis. Moreover, leptin
stimulation of phosphorylation of EIF4EBP1 and EIF4E phosphorylation,
which allows the initiation of translation was also prevented by blocking
the activation of MAPK and PI3K pathways.
Therefore, these results demonstrate that both PI3K and MAPK are
necessary to observe the effect of leptin stimulating protein synthesis in
choriocarcinoma cells JEG-3, and this effect is mediated at least in part by
activating the translation machinery signalling.
Keywords: Leptin receptor, Signal transduction, Protein synthesis,
Trophoblast

Background: Many drugs and substances are known to be teratogenic in
pregnancy, however much remains to be learned about the mechanisms of
cell damage across the placenta. Recent research has investigated DNA
damage across an artiﬁcial barrier consisting of a conﬂuent layer of Be Wo
cells, a tissue culture model of the human placenta. Bhabra et al showed
DNA damage in ﬁbroblasts when the barrier was subjected to nanoparticle
exposure [1]. Damage in the ﬁbroblasts was caused by a signalling process
as the metal nanoparticles did not cross the barrier. The process of
intercellular signalling involved gap junctions and purinergic (ATP)
transmission. The research has shown that the barrier increases cell and
DNA damage instead of being protective. Blocking cell to cell communication processes reduced this damage.
Objectives: Investigate if the real human placenta releases signals that
could cause DNA damage in human embryonic stem cells (or ﬁbroblasts as
control) if the placenta is exposed to nanoparticles or hypoxia
Design: Laboratory Study
Main outcomes: Level of DNA damage in two types of human cells;
ﬁbroblast cells and human embryonic stem cells. Ability of stem cells to
differentiate into germ cell layers after the exposure to signals from the
placenta.
Methods: We plan to recruit women over a 3 month period (May- August
2010) to sample ﬁrst and third trimester trophoblastic tissue. The extracted placental tissue will be dissected and either nanoparticles or medium
without nanoparticles will be added. This medium will then either be
analysed for the messaging chemicals which it contains, or transfered onto
other human cells and these cells analysed for DNA damage. Assessment of
DNA damage in ﬁbroblast cell lines will be done by Comet assay and
Gamma-H2AX. FISH will be used to assess aneuploidy or tetraploidy.
References:
(1) Bhabra G, Sood A, Fisher B, Cartwright L, Saunders M, Evans, WH,
Surprenant A, Lopez-Castejon G, Mann S, Davis S, Halis L, Ingham E, Verkade O, Lane J, Heesom K, Newson R, Case CP. Nanoparticles can cause DNA
damage across a cellular barrier. Nature Nanotechnology Vol 4 December
2009
Keywords: Signalling mechanisms, Teratogenesis, Trophoblastic tissue

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A.136

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.80]
ERK1/2 AND JAK2-STAT3 INTRACELLULAR SIGNALING PATHWAYS ARE
INVOLVED IN SEROTONIN-5HT2A RECEPTOR-INDUCED JEG-3 CELL
PROLIFERATION

[P3.81]
AROMATASE (CYP19) ACTIVITY AND EXPRESSION ARE INDUCED BY
SEROTONIN AND 5-HT2A-MEDIATED SIGNALLING IN PLACENTAL
TROPHOBLAST CELL MODELS

T Oufkir, C Vaillancourt*, INRS-Institut Armand Frappier, Canada

T Klempan, C Vaillancourt*, JT Sanderson, INRS-Institut Armand Frappier,
Université du Québec, Canada

Introduction: Serotonin has a mitogenic effect on various cell types. In
a previous study, we have demonstrated that serotonin through its 5-HT2A
receptor induces proliferation of trophoblast-like JEG-3 cells and activates
the MEK-ERK1/2 and JAK2-STAT3 signaling pathways.To better understand
the signaling pathway involved in the 5HT2A-induced JEG-3 cell proliferation, in this study we investigated the intracellular signaling cascade
involved in the 5HT2A-induced MEK-ERK1/2 and JAK2-STAT3 activation.
Methods: The effect of speciﬁc inhibitors of phospholipase C (PLC)b (U73122), PKC-b (Gö6976), PKC-z (GF109203X) and Ras
(farnesylthiosalicylic acid) on DOI-induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation was
determined by western blot. The effect of U0126 and AG490, speciﬁc
inhibitors of ERK1/2 and JAK2 respectively, on DOI-induced JEG-3 cell
proliferation, was analyzed by WST-1 proliferation assay.
Results: Western
blot analysis showed
that
U73122
and
farnesylthiosalicylic acid dose-dependently abolish, and Gö6976
decreases, the 5HT2A-induced ERK1/2 activation whereas GF109203X has
no effect. The JEG-3 cell proliferation induced by DOI (25mM) was fully
inhibited by both U0126 (25mM) and AG490 (30mM), as well as by
U73122 (560nM) and chelerythrine (500nM, speciﬁc inhibitor of PKCs).
Discussion: Our data demonstrates that both ERK1/2 and JAK2/STAT3 are
required for 5-HT2A-induced JEG-3 cell proliferation. Moreover, this study
indicates that 5HT2A-activates ERK1/2 phosphorylation through activation
of the PLCb-PKC-b-Ras pathway. These ﬁndings indicate that serotonin
through the activation of the 5-HT2A receptor is a key regulator of
trophoblast-like cell proliferation and may play a role in placental, and by
consequence in fetal development., Supported by a Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)
Keywords: serotonin 5-HT2A receptor, cell proliferation, JAK-STAT, MAPKs

Introduction: Estrogens regulate placental development and function and
are critical for maintenance of pregnancy and fetal health. It is known that
serotonin can affect the production and function of sex hormones, such as
estrogens. The key enzyme controlling estrogen synthesis during pregnancy is placental aromatase (CYP19). To better understand the regulation
of placental aromatase, this study was designed to determine whether
serotonin and 5-HT2A-signalling can regulate the expression and catalytic
function of this enzyme.
Methods: Aromatase activity and expression of placental I.1 and exon
II-derived CYP19 mRNA were determined in BeWo and JEG-3 cell lines
following exposure to serotonin and selective 5-HT2A agonists, or activators of PKA and PKC signalling.
Results: Serotonin and 5-HT2A agonists increased aromatase activity and
expression in both cell lines. Serotonin caused a maximal, statistically
signiﬁcant increase in aromatase activity of 1.5-fold in BeWo cells
following 24h exposure, while the selective 5-HT2A agonists DOI and TCB-2
increased activity by 1.8-fold and 2-fold, respectively. The expression of
CYP19 mRNA was also increased by serotonin, particularly through the
placental promoter I.1 (+ 1.5-fold in BeWo cells). Phorbol ester-mediated
PKC activation increased aromatase activity (+ 3.4-fold) and mRNA
expression (+ 1.9-fold), while activation of PKA by forskolin elevated
activity and expression by over 2.3-fold. Responses in JEG-3 line were
similar, but less pronounced, particularly for PKC-mediated activation of
aromatase. Effects on aromatase activity were blocked by 5-HT2A- and
PKC-selective antagonists in both cell lines.
Discussion: This study shows for the ﬁrst time that serotonergic signalling
modulates aromatase expression in placental trophoblast cells. More
detailed studies of serotonin-estrogen interactions through the 5-HT2A
receptor are vital to better understand their role during pregnancy, and
may help to explain gender-speciﬁc differences in symptoms of disorders
related to serotonin dysfunction, such as depression, and response to
selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
Keywords: CYP19 (aromatase), serotonin, trophoblast-like cells, 5-HT2A
receptor

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Abstracts / Placenta 31 (2010) A.1–A.137

[P3.82]
PRIMARY DECIDUAL STROMAL CELLS: A MODEL SYSTEM TO STUDY
WINGLESS (WNT) SIGNALLING IN HUMAN DECIDUALIZATION

A.137

[P3.83]
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PLACENTAL VOLUME IN EARLY
PREGNANCY, MEASURED USING A NOVEL SEMI-AUTOMATED
TECHNIQUE, AND THE SMALL FOR GESTATIONAL AGE (SGA) FETUS

Leila Saleh*, Martin Knoeﬂer, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Objective: Recent investigation indicated that various components of the
Wnt signalling pathway are regulated in a menstrual cycle-dependent
manner suggesting a role in implantation and endometrial function.
However, activity of canonical Wnt signalling during human decidualization still remains to be elucidated. To study differentiation-dependent
expression of Wnt genes we sought to evaluate an in vitro decidualization
model system using isolated stromal ﬁbroblasts of the placental bed.
Methods: Primary human ﬁbroblast of the decidual part of legal abortions
were isolated by enzymatic digestion and stimulated with 8-Bromo-cAMP
or progesterone (P)/17b-estradiol (E) for 3, 6, 9, and 12 days. To analyse
decidualization-dependent gene expression two well described marker
genes, IGFBP1 and prolactin, were evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR.
Subsequently, mRNA expressions of selected Wnt ligands, Frizzled receptors as well as inhibitors of canonical Wnt signalling such as Dickkopf-1
(DKK1) were analyzed by semiquantitative RT-PCR or real-time analyses,
respectively. Furthermore, canonical Wnt reporter plasmids were transfected into decidualizing cultures to gain more insight into the temporal
regulation of Wnt signalling.
Results: Real time analyses revealed cAMP-dependent mRNA expression
of prolactin and IGFBP1 peaking on day 3, while mRNA levels steadily
increased from 3 to 12 days upon addition of E/P. Secreted IGFBP1 protein
detected in supernatants of cultures by Western blotting mirrored mRNA
expression. DKK1 mRNA was induced on day 3 in the presence of E/P, but
not by cAMP, remaining at a high levels during the whole stimulation
period. Furthermore, decidualization-dependent induction of Wnt4 and
Wnt6 could be observed. Measurement of luciferase activity showed
enhanced transcription of Wnt reporter plasmids in the presence of E/P.
Conclusion: Primary human ﬁbroblasts isolated from the placental bed
provide a valuable tool to study decidualization-dependent processes
when stimulated with E/P. Differentially regulated Wnt components at
early and late stages of differentiation and E/P-dependent stimulation of
reporter plasmids suggest a critical role of canonical Wnt signalling in
decidualization.
Keywords: human decidua, stromal cells, Wnt signalling, differentiation

S.L. Collins* 1,3, G.N. Stevenson2, A. Noble2, L. Impey3
The Nufﬁeld Dept of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK, 2 The Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK, 3 The Fetal Medicine Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK
1

Introduction: Evidence is growing that fetal growth restriction secondary
to placental insufﬁciency may be predicted early in pregnancy by placental
volume. However, until now, 3-D ultrasound measurement of the placenta
has had to be undertaken by hand using manual delineation or VOCAL (GE
Medical Systems). This is time consuming and relegates the calculation of
placental volume to a research tool. We sought to investigate whether our
novel, semi-automated technique for estimating placental volume in the
ﬁrst trimester could be used to predict the small for gestational age (SGA)
fetus.
Methods: With ethical approval, we prospectively recruited women with
a singleton pregnancy and a BMI of 35. A 3-D ultrasound scan was performed using a Voluson E8 (GE Medical systems) at between 12 and 15
weeks gestation. The placental volume was calculated using our previously
validated technique. Uterine artery Doppler screening was undertaken at
23 weeks gestation. Delivery data including birth-weight was collected
and customised centiles calculated using the ‘Grow’ package (West
Midlands Perinatal Institute); SGA was deﬁned as <10th centile. The
placental volumes of SGA fetuses were compared with those with a birthweight 10th centile by linear regression analysis using SPSS (SPSS inc).
Results: 65 women were recruited to the study, all had an ultrasound scan
between 12+5 weeks and 15+0 weeks gestation. Seven women had SGA
babies (birth-weights between <1st and 8th centile); only one had raised
uterine artery Doppler indices at 23 weeks (birth weight <1st centile).
Linear regression analysis with correction for gestation showed that SGA
babies had signiﬁcantly smaller placentas in early pregnancy (p¼0.028).
Discussion: Low placental volume in early pregnancy appears to correlate
with low birth-weight. Our semi-automated technique is robust enough to
detect these differences and may aid in the development of an ultrasoundbased screening test for growth restriction

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

