Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Autoimmunity Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/autrev

The link between immunity, autoimmunity and endometriosis: a literature
update
Tao Zhanga,b,1, Caterina De Carolisc,

⁎⁎,1

, Gene Chi Wai Mana,d, Chi Chiu Wanga,e,f,

T

⁎

a

Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong
Shenzhen Youshare Biotechnology Co. Ltd, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
c
Polymedical Center for Prevention of Recurrent Spontaneous Abortion, Rome, Italy
d
Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong
e
Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
f
School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
b

A R T I C LE I N FO

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Endometriosis (EMS)
Autoimmune disease (AD)
Autoantibodies
Complement (C)
Cytokines
Immune escape
Immunomodulators

Endometriosis (EMS), an estrogen-dependent inﬂammatory disorder aﬀects approximately 5–10% of the general
female population of reproductive age and 20–90% of women with pelvic pain and infertility. Many immunological factors are known to contribute signiﬁcantly to the pathogenesis and pathophysiology of EMS, and
both chronic local inﬂammation and autoantibodies in EMS shares many similarities with autoimmune diseases
(AD). However, the autoimmune etiology in EMS remains controversial, and its evidence on autoimmune basis
may be limited. Here we aim to review the current understanding between autoimmunity and EMS to provide
important knowledge to develop future potential immunomodulatory therapy for the treatment of EMS.

1. Introduction
Endometriosis (EMS), deﬁned by the presence of endometrial glands
and stroma outside the uterus, is a common chronic disease aﬀecting up
to 10% of the general female population of reproductive age [1,2] and
20-90% women with pelvic pain and infertility. Exacting prevalence in
the population is diﬃcult to determine because it is asymptomatic or
subclinical in the majority of cases. Although its pathogenesis has not
been completely identiﬁed, EMS has been characterized as an estrogendependent chronic inﬂammatory disease. [2–4] The most popular and
widely accepted etiology is Sampson’s theory of retrograde menstruation. [5] This theory describes how viable endometrial tissue can be
spread into the peritoneal cavity through the fallopian tubes during
menstruation eliciting an inﬂammatory response. This was further
supported by ﬁnding showing women with EMS with greater volume of
reﬂuxed blood during menses than those without EMS. [6] Recent
evidences suggest that the endocrine/paracrine inﬂuences and immunological aspects such as growth factors, cytokines, immune cells
and hormones have been proposed as involved in the pathophysiology
of EMS-related infertility, via altering both the eutopic and the ectopic

endometrium. [1–3,6,7–9] However because not all women with reﬂux
menstruation also have EMS, the retrograde menstruation theory
cannot explain all case of EMS. One theory to complement the retrograde menstruation is the autoimmunity theory. EMS is associated with
a chronic local inﬂammatory process and the presence of autoantibodies, and these are characteristics of other autoimmune diseases
(AD). [10–12] If autoimmunity is present, immunomodulatory therapy
for AD might then be used as a potential treatment for EMS without the
shortcoming of current hormonal and surgical therapy. [13] In this
review, we aim to connect the lines of evidence that link the (auto)
immune dysfunction with the pathophysiology of EMS and the comparison and association with AD for developing potential treatments.
2. Pathophysiology of endometriosis
Animal models and human samples are paramount in the study of
pathogenesis and progression of EMS. Many factors are involved in this
disease, endocrine alterations but also an altered immune response
against endometrial cells including inﬂammation and cytokine/chemokine expression. These last factors not only cannot eﬀectively

⁎
Correspondence to: Chi-Chiu Wang, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR.
⁎⁎
Correspondence to: Caterina De Carolis, Polymedical Center for Prevention of Recurrent Spontaneous Abortion, Rome, Italy.
E-mail addresses: caterina.decarolis@fastwebnet.it (C. De Carolis), ccwang@cuhk.edu.hk (C.C. Wang).
1
Tao Zhang and Caterina De Carolis contributed equally to this work

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2018.03.017
Received 15 March 2018; Accepted 20 March 2018
Available online 11 August 2018
1568-9972/ © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

T. Zhang et al.

with high levels of free redox-active iron that retrospectively act as an
autophagic stimulus [24] and on the other hand, a dramatic loss of the
master inducer of apoptosis and negative regulator of cell proliferation,
p53 [25] has been observed in ovarian endometriotic cyst tissues,
which in addition to suggesting that apoptosis is impaired, may also be
responsible for stimulating autophagy. According to a more recent
study, the expression of HIF-1α (hypoxia-inducible factor-1α), a heterodimeric transcriptional factor mediating the cellular response to
hypoxia, is increased in ovarian endometriotic lesions and enhances the
migration and invasion of HESCs by upregulating autophagy in a hypoxic environment. Thus, autophagy is also induced through HIF-dependent pathways, which are involved in the high autophagy level
detected in ovarian endometriotic lesions [21].

remove endometrial debris in the pelvic cavity from menstrual blood
ﬂow, but also can facilitate its implantation, neoangiogenesis and
proliferation.
2.1. Endometrium
The ovarian steroid hormones regulate endometrial function and
human menstruation. After human ovulation, the corpus luteum secretes high levels of progesterone to maintain endometrial receptivity
should fertilization occur. In the absence of pregnancy the corpus luteum regresses, causing a sharp decline in circulating progesterone levels. This triggers a local inﬂammatory response in the endometrium
involving inﬁltration of leukocytes, cytokine release, oedema and activation of matrix metalloproteinases. [14] The processes involved in
endometrial repair appear to be analogous to classic wound healing and
include inﬂammation, its resolution, angiogenesis, tissue formation and
tissue remodelling. The human endometrium has two central balancing
factors, estrogen and progestogen and these control autophagy in endometrial Ishikawa cells during the menstrual cycle. Ishikawa cells are
typically cultured in the presence of both hormones, and an increased
degree of autophagy and a higher incidence of apoptotic cell death is
observed upon the withdrawal of one or both hormones. As a nonapoptotic form of programmed cell death, autophagy is the major cellular pathway for the degradation of long-lived proteins and cytoplasmic organelles in eukaryotic cells [15] and the induction of autophagy exerts a pro-apoptotic eﬀect on normal human endometrial
cells. [16] Based on accumulating evidences, the level of autophagy is
most likely associated with the pathogenesis of EMS. The cross-talk
between autophagy, a pathway that functions primarily in cell survival,
and apoptosis, a pathway that invariably leads to cell death, is complex.
The two pathways are regulated by common factors, they share
common components, and each can regulate and modify the activity of
the other. [17,18] Many signals originally studied in the context of
apoptosis activation induce autophagy, whereas signals that inhibit
apoptosis also inhibit autophagy. [19] However, it does seem likely that
the coordinated regulation of ‘self-digestion’ by autophagy and ‘selfkilling’ by apoptosis may underlie diverse aspects of development,
tissue homeostasis and disease pathogenesis. [18] Autophagy plays
important roles in the process of cell growth, diﬀerentiation, tissue
remodeling, cell immunity, environmental adaptation, and death such
as apoptosis. EMS-derived endometrial tissues are characterized by
reduced autophagy compared with the normal endometrium [20,21]
and estrogen promotes the survival of human secretory phase endometrial stromal cells via CXCL12/CXCR4 up-regulation-mediated
autophagy inhibition. [22] The ability of cells to undergo autophagy is
reduced in the ectopic and eutopic endometrium of patients with EMS,
and autophagy has been shown to be related to the pathogenesis and
progression of EMS. In eutopic EMS foci, a slightly decreased level of
autophagy is identiﬁed in both proliferative EECs and ESCs compared
with the endometrium from controls. [20,21] Regarding ectopic endometriotic tissues, Ruiz et al. [23] have identiﬁed a decrease in autophagy levels in endometrial glandular epithelial cells (EECs) and
endometrial stromal cells (ESCs) throughout the menstrual cycle;
however, diﬀerences were observed among distinct endometriotic lesions (from ovaries, fallopian tubes, peritoneal, gastrointestinal, and
skin). Furthermore the induction of autophagy in endometrial cells
treated with estrogen alone (as in the proliferative phase) increase with
the addition of progesterone (as in the secretory phase) and simultaneously diversiﬁcation is observed with the removal of estrogen and
progesterone (as in the menstrual phase). These ﬁndings demonstrate
that the low level of autophagy observed in secretory phase ESCs is
involved in the pathogenesis of EMS. [23] Accordingly, ESCs are primarily involved in the interaction between the endometrial tissue and
the mesothelial cell lining of the peritoneum and play a fundamental
role in the pathogenesis of EMS. Endometriotic cells inside the ovarian
endometriotic cysts experience a persistent condition of oxidative stress

3. EMS is an inﬂammatory disease: role of immune response
3.1. Monocytes/macrophages
The prime regulators of the innate immune response are macrophages which come into play in case of injury, damage and infection.
Macrophages are an integral component of the mononuclear phagocyte
system (MPS). After reaching peripheral tissues, they reside as macrophages or antigen-presenting cells (APC) including dendritic cells
(DCs). In mouse models, in the absence of macrophages, endometriotic
tissue retains the ability to adhere to the peritoneal layer. Peripheral
monocytes and peritoneal macrophages have been studied extensively
in pathogenesis of EMS [26].
One of the main functions of macrophage is phagocytosis mediated
by scavenger receptors for cell recognition and regulated by various
cytokines and growth factors. The defect in phagocytic ability of macrophages in EMS has been associated with downregulation of scavenger
receptors expression and reduced function of the CD36, a class B scavenger receptor. [27] Women aﬀected of EMS have a signiﬁcantly
higher concentrations of PF macrophages, even when compared to
cases with abdominal infections. In the latter condition, a predominance of neutrophils has been observed (85% of PF leukocytes).
The mechanism responsible for such cell distribution is still unknown.
Akoum et al. [28] demonstrated that peritoneal macrophages of these
women had an increased capacity to secrete MCP-1 (monocyte chemotactic protein-1) [28] a member of the small inducible gene family,
which plays a role in the recruitment of monocytes to sites of injury and
inﬂammation. When the macrophages were depleted by clodronate liposomes after the establishment of the endometriotic lesion, the
glandular and stromal structure of the lesions was morphologically
distorted and ultimately failed to grow. [26] This observation implies
that macrophages are not only involved in the early immune escape of
endometriotic cells, but also are favored later establishment and growth
with the cytokines produced. Importantly, these ﬁndings showed that
aberrant increased inﬂammatory cytokines produced by the endometriotic lesion and peritoneal immune cells, especially macrophages, would critically contribute to the pathogenesis of EMS in which
they can interact with each other to convey a cascade of functions.
3.2. Cytokines
The adaptive immune system includes of two main types of lymphocytes: T and B cells. Each of these originate from diﬀerent lymphoid
organs: the thymus and bone marrow, respectively. Cytokines are
proteins produced and secreted by a variety of cells including stromal
cells, ﬁbroblasts, and endothelial cells. In the immune system they are
produced by leukocytes and exert their function on other leukocytes or
tissues that express the cytokine receptor. [29] Pro-inﬂammatory cytokine activated macrophages have an essential role in the onset and
progression of EMS. Both the endometrial and inﬁltrating immune cells
produce inﬂammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8,
IL-17 [10] that further stimulate a cascade of inﬂammatory response.
946

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

T. Zhang et al.

derived from the PF and peripheral blood, respectively, of patients with
EMS and controls. This study suggests that elevations in Tregs in patients with EMS are not systemic but are locally induced in the peritoneal cavity [60].

[30] This creates a regulatory feed forward loop inﬂuencing both the
progression and symptomatology of the disease [31] resulting in a
unique microenvironment that contributes to these lesions being able to
evade immune surveillance. [32] TNF-α mainly acts as a precursor to
initiate inﬂammatory response at the acute phase by activating a cascade of other cytokines, such as IL-1, IL-6 and VEGF. [33] In addition it
can promote the adherence of ectopic endometrial cells to the peritoneum [34] and plays a crucial role on increasing the invasiveness of
endometrial fragments by upregulating MMP and reducing the eﬀect of
tissue inhibitors of MMP. [35] IL-1 plays a central role in the regulation
of inﬂammation and immune response and peritoneal IL-1β has been
found to onset cascade of other cytokine production in endometriotic
stromal cells, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) to
promote angiogenesis and [36,37] IL-6 stimulate stromal cell proliferation. [38] sICAM-1 is able to impair NK cell activity, [39,40] B
cells proliferation and autoantibody production. [41] IL-8 concentration in the peritoneal ﬂuid and serum seems to be higher in women with
EMS [42] than women without EMS. [43] In addition to macrophages,
eutopic and ectopic endometrial cells are another important source of
IL-8, [44] and also IL-17A released by endometriotic lesions signiﬁcantly increase angiogenic cytokines (IL-8,VEGF,) and proinﬂammatory cytokines (IL-6 and IL-1β) in the peritoneal cavity favoring
the establishment, proliferation and migration of endometriotic cells
[45,26].

3.4. Dendritic cells
Dendritic cells (DCs) are bone marrow-derived hemotopoietic cells
which act as a “bridge” between innate and adaptive immunity. They
are critically involved in the initiation and modulation of the adaptive
immune response by recognizing and capturing antigens to naïve T cells
as well as immune tolerance in inﬂammatory and neoplastic diseases.
DCs are extremely heterogeneous and subpopulations can be deﬁned
based on their origin and function. Schulke et al. [61] demonstrated
signiﬁcant increase of immature DCs (iDCs) in peritoneal endometriotic
lesions and in the surrounding peritoneum when compared with paired
eutopic endometrium and peritoneum distant from the lesion, [61]
while the mature DCs (mDCs) have opposite results. This ﬁnding suggested that the endometriotic lesions or its peritoneal microenvironment would prominently recruit iDCs, rather than mDCs, to clear the
ectopic endometrium. However, the increased iDCs may not be capable
to present a detectable ectopic antigen in the endometriotic lesions for
T cells to recognize due to its defectiveness in maturation. More recently, diﬀerent subtypes of DCs were compared in peritoneal ﬂuid
from women with and without EMS. Myeloid conventional DC type 1
(MDC1s), type 2 (MDC2s) and plasmacytoid DC (pDC) were similar
between groups, where MDC1s constituted the main proportion [62].
Further analysis of surface markers of MDC1s showed that Mannose
Receptor (MR) + MDC1s were signiﬁcantly increased in women with
EMS. [62] The MR, a pattern recognition receptor belonging to the Ctype lectin superfamily, mediates recognition and uptake of pathogens
as well as endocytosis and phagocytosis. [63] It remains uncertain on
why MR+MDC1s fail to clear the ectopic endometrial cells. The results
of murine model to study the role of DCs of EMS is quite controversial.
In a study conducted by Fainaru et al. [64] was reported that supplementation of DCs led to enhancement of endometriotic lesion growth
and angiogenesis. [64,65] On the other hand, another study showed
activated DCs within endometriotic lesions impaired the establishment
of endometriotic lesions by enhancing the activity of T cells. [66] Although both study utilized the same process to ablate DCs, diﬀerence
may relate to how the murine model was derived. The size and amount
of endometrial biopsies being employed in the model are matter. Certainly, varying immune response may be resulted when compared suturing four pieces of 2-mm endometrial biopsy to peritoneal wall with
injecting a large bulk of endometrial fragments into peritoneal cavity.
Hence, similar comparable models are needed to elucidate the role of
DCs in the development of EMS.

3.3. T-cells
T-helper 1 (Th1) T-helper 2 (Th2) imbalance has been associated
with EMS wherein the pro-inﬂammatory Th1 proﬁle dominates over the
Th2 anti-inﬂammatory response. One of the key regulators of immune
processes in EMS are regulatory T cells (Tregs) derived from CD4
lineage. Tregs are produced naturally in the thymus and express the
forkhead box P3 transcription factor (Foxp3+). Cytokine-induced increase of Foxp3 expression drives Tregs diﬀerentiation/activation and
suppresses the response of eﬀector T cell proliferation and FoxP3-expressing CD4+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) play an indispensable role in
the maintenance of self-tolerance and immune homeostasis [46] and
are involved in various human diseases, such as autoimmune diseases,
allergies, and cancer. [47–49] The absence or depletion of Tregs lead to
multi-systemic autoimmunity in mice and humans. [50] Tregs induce
immune tolerance by production of IL-10, TGF-β, and anti-inﬂammatory cytokines that inhibit T helper cell activation. In line with a
role for a modiﬁed immunity in the pathogenesis of EMS, CD4+/
FoxP3+ Tregs are present in endometriotic lesions. [51] In humans,
conﬂicting results have been obtained regarding whether populations of
Tregs in the peritoneal ﬂuid (PF) or peripheral blood (PB) diﬀer signiﬁcantly between patients with EMS and controls, [52–54] even if
FoxP3 mRNA is increased in ectopic endometrial tissue, since the percentage of Tregs and its cytokines products is signiﬁcantly reduced in
the peripheral ﬂuid from women with EMS compared to normal controls. However in the peritoneal ﬂuid the Treg percentage is increased.
[53] This discrepancy could suggest a diﬀerential immune modulatory
system at the local and global levels. The polymorphisms of FOXP3 gene
may change the quantity or function of Tregs as in AD, and FOXP3 gene
was predominantly restricted to the function or cell numbers of Tregs.
[55] A Brazilian study showed remarkable association on the FOXP3
polymorphisms associated with risk of idiopathic infertility and EMS.
[56] Recently has been demonstrated that also TECK derived from
endometrial stromal cells and macrophages promotes the diﬀerentiation and cytokines production of Tregs. [57] According to several studies, a strong association between Transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) levels in PF and EMS has been observed, [58] and TGF-β induces
FoxP3+ Tregs and inhibits the proliferation of immune cells and cytokine production via FoxP3-dependent and independent mechanisms.
[59] Recently was assessed the immunotolerance of patients with EMS
by analyzing Treg subpopulations in macrophages and monocytes

3.5. Natural killer cells (NK)
The peritoneal environment of women with EMS demonstrate
quantitative and qualitative changes in monocyte/macrophage and
natural killer cells (NK), multifunctional immune cells responsible for
cell mediated immunity able to control the activity of other cells with a
key role in the pathogenesis of EMS and the cytotoxic activity of peripheral and peritoneal NK cells was obviously decreased with the severity of the disease. [67–69] These changes may disturb the surveillance, recognition and destruction of misplaced endometrial cells and
this situation may possible leads to EMS [70]. NK cells constitute a
major component of the innate immune system and play a crucial role
in anti-tumour immunity because of their innate ability to diﬀerentiate
between malignant versus normal cells. [71] They participate in the
host defense by ﬁrstly expressing diﬀerent receptors binding to target
cells, such as immunoglobulin G (IgG) while the second receptors
would either promote cytotoxic activity, e.g. killer-activating receptors
(KAR), or suppress cytotoxic activity, e.g. killer-inhibitory receptors
947

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

T. Zhang et al.

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the complex pathophysiology of endometriosis with immunity. Endometrium ﬂow through fallopian tube into peritoneal cavity
during menstruation. (A) Retrograded endometrium can usually be cleared by peritoneal immune cells in normal healthy individuals. (B) However, once an endometriotic fragment bypassed the immunosurveillance and adhere onto the peritoneum wall, a cascade of cytokines regulation will begin. Impaired NK cell activity
with lower expression of KAR but higher expression of KIR, decreased phagocytosis of macrophages with decreased expression of scavenger receptors, and induction
of Tregs are involved in helping endometrium escaping from peritoneal immunosurveillance. Dramatic increase of MDSCs within short time after the presence of
endometrium in peritoneal cavity might be the reason causing depressed immunosurveillance. Cytokines ICAM-1, IL-6, IL-8, VEGF etc. released by ectopic endometrium and immune cells might be another reason causing immune tolerance and they also contribute to following adhesion, invasion, angiogenesis and growth.
Higher frequency of autoantibodies in peritoneal cavity is also identiﬁed in women with endometriosis. (C) The changes of cellular and hormonal immune response in
peritoneal cavity, follicular ﬂuid and endometrium lead to decreased fecundity, even infertility by reducing endometrial receptivity, oocyte quality, sperm mobility
and embryo cytotoxicity. KAR = killer-activating receptors; KIR = killer-inhibotory receptors; mDC = mature dendritic cells; iDC = immature dendritic cells;
Tregs = T regulatory cells; IL = interleukin; PDGF = platelet derived growth factor; ICAM-1 = intercellular adhesion molecule-1; MCP-1 = monocyte chemotactic
protein-1; TGF-β = transforming growth factor-β; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor; TNF-α = tumor necrosis factor-α.

(KIR). The decrease in NK-mediated cytotoxicity in the peritoneal ﬂuid
might promote retrograded endometrial cells to escape immune surveillance and promote its lesion establishment on the peritoneal cavity.
Although the exact mechanism that brought upon aberrant NK cell
cytotoxicity are not completely clear, previous literatures indicated the
involvement in overexpression of KIR, such as KIR2DL1 [72,73] and
increase of soluble ligands (MICA, MICB and ULBP-2) for the NKG2D
receptor (a subclass of KAR) to impair NK cell function. [32] More recently, increased peritoneal IL-6 produced by ectopic endometrium was
reported to display a suppressive eﬀect on NK cell activity through the
modulation of Src homology region 2-containing protein tyrosine
phosphatase-2 (SHP-2) expression. [74] Similarly, higher level of IL-15
in peritoneal ﬂuid and ectopic endometrium from patients with EMS
has been demonstrated, when compared with control group, which
enable endometrial stromal cells to escape immune surveillance by
inhibiting cytotoxic activity of NK cells. [75] Consistently, platelet-derived transforming growth factor-β released by endometrial stromal
cells suppresses the expression of NKG2D on NK cells leading to decreased cytotoxicity in women with EMS. [76,77] Again, the aberrant
cytokines in peritoneal ﬂuid are the potential reasons causing dysfunction of NK cells in EMS. EMS showed higher percentage of cytotoxic
CD16+ uNK cells and higher ratio of p46+NK:CD56+NK cells in the
eutopic endometrium when compared with fertile control women. [78]
This indicates that altered uNK cells in women with EMS may also
generate an excessive inﬂammatory and hypoxia environment during
embryo implantation or decidualization to increase the risk for infertility and miscarriage [78].

women with EMS has been identiﬁed since the last century, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Recently, we reported for the ﬁrst
time to the best of our knowledge that myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) play a critical role in the pathogenesis of EMS. [79] MDSCs are
deﬁned by their myeloid origin immature state [80] and fot their ability
to potently suppress T cell responses as well as those of NK cells and B
cells and are highly immunosuppressive. [81] These cells are found in
small numbers in healthy status, and they rapidly expand in response to
cancer, infections and inﬂammation. [82,83] In our study MDSCs were
increased in peripheral blood of patients with EMS and MDSCs decreased following laparoscopic excision of the endometriotic lesions.
This suggested that MDSCs might be involved in the process of EMS.
Further analysis revealed that MDSCs promote the development of EMS
in animal models. Based on the well-known immune suppressive role of
MDCSs in tumors, we believe that MDSCs might contribute to the escape of ectopic endometrial cells from immune surveillance through 1)
inducing diﬀerentiation of Tregs [84] 2) dysfunction of NK cells cytotoxic activity [85,86] and 3) promoting polarization of M2 macrophages which was characterized with decreased phagocytosis but increased tissue remodeling and angiogenesis [87,88] thereby
contributing to the development of EMS.
5. Adhesion/invasion, angiogenesis and proliferation/growth
In order for endometriotic lesions to occur, the cells must invade
and implant in distant locations. Both monocyte chemotactic protein-1
(MCP-1) and regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) are signiﬁcantly increased in peritoneal ﬂuid from
women with EMS and these concentrations are signiﬁcantly correlated
with severity of the disease. [89,90] The main source for the production
of these two chemokines is from the ectopic endometrium. [91,92] In

4. Myeloid derived suppressor cells
Although the characteristics of aberrant cell mediated immunity in
948

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

T. Zhang et al.

6.2. B-cells and autoantibodies

addition to being the chemotaxis of macrophages to peritoneal cavity,
MCP-1 promotes the growth of endometriotic lesions by stimulating the
proliferation and invasiveness of endometrial cells directly. [89,93]
Also, there was evidence indicating that RANTES might be associated
with the aberrant proliferation and apoptosis of endometriotic cells.
[94] Cell adhesion molecules, including integrins, cadherins and ICAM1, are expressed in endometrial and mesothelial cell surface to promote
endometrial-mesothelial adhesion. Following adhesion, endometrial
cells invade the peritoneal tissue by proteolytic digestion of extracellular matrix (ECM), such as serine proteases and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) [95] and have increased adhesive capacity to
various components of the ECM including collagen type IV, laminin,
vitronectin and ﬁbronectin. ECM degradation could play a key role in
initiation of EMS. [96] Furthermore growth and development of endometrial cells will heavily depend on neovascularization that is
mediated by cytokines produced by immune cells, peritoneal cavity and
retrograde sheds (summarized in Fig. 1). In particular the expression of
VEGF, which is dependent on estradiol, hypoxia and peritoneal inﬂammatory cytokines, is known to be an important precursor toward
promoting the pathological angiogenesis for the endometrial lesions to
grow and develop [97]. With the neovascularization formed, the proliferation of endometriotic cells and endothelial cells are further stimulated by various growth factors circulated in the peritoneal ﬂuid,
such as insulin-like growth factor (IGF), TGF-β, platelet derived growth
factor (PDGF), macrophage-colony stimulating factor (MCSF) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) [98,99]. Glycodelin A (GdA), a protein
secreted by endometrial glands during the secretory, but not the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, is reduced in uterine ﬂushings but
also in the epithelial endometrium of women with EMS. These ﬁndings
conﬁrm that biomarkers associated with implantation window are reduced in these women and indicate that proangiogenic factors have
pivotal roles in the pathogenesis of EMS [100,101].

EMS shares many charateristics with AD, since women aﬀected
exhibit altered immune surveillance with abnormal functions of T and B
cells, heightened humoral immune response (high serum levels of IgG,
IgA, IgM autoantibodies, and anti-endometrial antibodies) and inﬂammatory tissue damage. [11,107] The increased B-cell function was
ﬁrstly documented in the 1980’s. [108,109] Around the same year,
Weed and coworkers [110] reported that C3 and IgG deposited in the
endometrium of women with EMS is associated with a reduction in the
serum total complement level, which suggested an intra-endometrial
antigen-antibody reaction. [110] Further studies demonstrated higher
incidence of autoantibodies in sera, cervical and vaginal secretions from
women with EMS. [111–114] However, the correlation between autoantibodies concentration and the severity of EMS remains controversial.
[115–118] As anti-endometrial antibodies are the most well-studied
autoantibodies, it has been characterized as a potential diagnostic or
follow-up marker on the assessment of treatment and recurrence toward EMS. Such profound anti-endometrial antibodies include transferrin and alpha 2 Heremans Schmidt (α2-HS) glycoprotein. The levels
of endometrial transferrin in the peritoneal ﬂuid of patients with EMS
are signiﬁcantly elevated, whereas the serum levels are lower when
compared with controls. [111] With the concentration of transferrin
and α2-HS glycoprotein being found higher in peritoneal ﬂuid from
women with EMS, it has been showed that transferrin attenuates FSHinduced diﬀerentiation of granulosa cells and might consequently lead
to the varying degrees of ovarian dysfunction. [119] α2-HS glycoprotein, a negative acute phase protein, suppresses the maturation conversion of mouse embryo zona pellucida protein ZP3 to ZP3f and causes
polyspermia. [120] Furthermore the addition of antibodies speciﬁcally
to transferrin and α 2-HS glycoprotein to sperm cells in vitro can inhibit
motility and survival. [111] Finally, an alteration of cellular mediated
immunity and higher prevalence of autoantibodies in women with endometriosis would consequently aﬀect fecundity. This can lead to a
disturbance on endometrial receptivity, oocyte quality, sperm motility,
fertilization failure and embryotoxicity summarized in Fig. 1.
On the other hand, the reason causing the elevated purge of autoantibodies in women with EMS is still uncertain. Case reports have
suggested co-morbidity of EMS with the autoimmune disorders alopecia
universalis, autoimmune thyroiditis, multiple sclerosis (MS), and autoimmune progesterone dermatitis. [121,122] Recently identiﬁcation
of shared molecular signature indicate the susceptibility of EMS to MS,
with shared genes up-regulating both EMS and MS such Neuronal
growth regulator 1 (NEGR1), leptin receptor (LEPR), Cholinergic receptor muscarinic 3(CH3M3), Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor type
1 (ITPR1) the last able to disregulate oocyte meiosis and calcium signaling pathway. Diﬀerent shared genes are able to down regulate both
EMS and MS, such as Solute carrier family 8 member A1 (SLC8A1), Erbb2 receptor tyrosine kinase 3 (ERBB3), Cadherin 1 (CDH1), Integrin
subunit beta8 (ITGB8) Protein tyrosine phosphatase, non receptor type
11 (PTPN11), and Protein phosphatase 2 regulatory subunit B epsilon
(PPP2R5E). The last one is able to disregulate oocyte meiosis. [123] A
comparative evaluation of clinical and humoral immunologic abnormalities between SLE and EMS has observed that the diseases are associated, but that this association is confounded by hysterectomy, oophorectomy, and analgesic use. EMS was also associated with a lesser
magnitude with RA risk, and this association was similarly inﬂuenced
by hysterectomy, oophorectomy, and analgesic use. Perhaps the associations are primarily explained by a common inﬂuence of hormonal
factors and immunologic abnormalities, although in these analyses little
confounding was observed after adjustment for reproductive history
and other hormonal factors. [124] Furthermore also Graves disease, an
AD characterized by an IgG antibody binds to the thyroid-stimulating
hormone receptor (TSHR) is linked with EMS. [125] This association
was explained for the high incidence of positive antinuclear antibodies
(ANA) in both the disease and for diﬀerential expression of the estrogen

6. Between innate immunity and humoral-mediated immunity
6.1. Complement system (CS)
One of the most important immune mechanisms taking part in the
peritoneal clearance and inﬂammation is the complement system (CS).
[102–104] The complement (C), a crucial component of the innate
immune system, consists of over 30 small proteins which act as a cascade of proteases that activate each other in an enzymatic fashion, with
eﬀector mechanisms mediated by several speciﬁc cell receptors. The
general function of the C is to recognize microbial pathogens and other
target cells and let them lyse. The C cascade can be activated via one of
three pathways: the classical pathway, the lectin pathway and the alternative pathway. These pathways are activated via diﬀerent recognition molecules. We have demonstrated [105] that human follicular ﬂuid (FF) contain functionally active C in amounts similar to those
present in normal human serum. The presence of active C in FF may be
very important for the function of the enzymatic multi-factorial mechanisms, included ovulation. [105] More recently has been demonstrated a higher concentration of C factors in peritoneal ﬂuid of women
with EMS in comparison to control. [106] Moreover, C levels were
increased in women with an early stage of disease compared to advanced EMS. The results showed higher levels of C1q, the recognition
molecule of the classical pathway that has the ability to modulate the
functions of immune and non-immune cells and Mannose-Binding
Lectin (MBL), a serum pattern recognition molecule, able to activate C
in association with MASP proteases. Both the factors which started the
classical and lectin activation of the C system, so it may suggest that the
activation of C in women with EMS is correct and is a further link between EMS initiating events and immune surveillance via Complement
system.

949

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

T. Zhang et al.

[144].
The depletion of ATTG results in the loss of binding to nuclear
proteins and reduces promoter activity. In EMS the frequency of the
ATTG [2]/ATTG [2] genotype and ATTG [2] allele was signiﬁcantly
increased when compared with healthy individuals. This suggested that
the polymorphism of NF-κB gene might be a predisposition gene toward
EMS susceptibility [145].
AD are usually associated with certain HLA alleles. [146] Similar
phenomenon has also been observed in EMS. [11] In the Japanese
population, Class I HLA-B54 and HLA-Cw7, class II HLA-DRB1*1403
and HLADQB1*0301 were associated with EMS. [147–148] Another
study found that EMS was associated with class I HLA-B*0702 alleles, in
linkage disequilibrium with HLA-A24, HLA-Cw*0702 and class II HLADRB1*0101 alleles [149] while in the Chinese population, class I HLAB46, class II HLA-DRB1*15, and HLADQA1*0401 were reported to be
associated with EMS. [150–152] However, this was not replicable in the
Korean population [153].
Similarly, the association between HLA alleles and EMS was not
consistent in Europe. In a study conducted by Sundqvist et al., they
found signiﬁcant association between CCL21, HLA-DRB1 and EMS in
the Swedish/Belgian population [154] however this association was not
found in the Polish population. [155] The disparity between the different populations indicated multiple genetic factors might be involved
to result in variable prevalence of EMS among diﬀerent ethnicities.

receptor beta gene (ESR2) conﬁrmed in patients with EMS and associated with susceptibility to Graves disease [126,127].
Another possible explanation that can lead to self-tolerance breakdown women with EMS [128] is the overexpression of B lymphocyte
activating factor (BAFF), alternatively called B lymphocyte stimulator
(BLyS), member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) ligand superfamily.
Increasing evidence suggests that BAFF is essentially implicated in the
pathogenesis of B cell-mediated AD and increased serum levels of BAFF
were reported in both non-organ-speciﬁc AD (such as systemic lupus
erythematosus and Sjögrens’s syndrome) and organ-speciﬁc conditions.
[129–131] In addition, as the mRNA levels expressed by macrophages
and its receptor BCMA expressed by plasma cells was strongly upregulated in endometriotic lesions, this indicated their role in facilitating the survival of plasma cells [128].
Other studies showed that signiﬁcantly elevated IgG antilaminin-1
antibodies are strongly associated with EMS in infertile patients. [132]
Laminin is a major multifunctional basement membrane glycoprotein
with at least 15 known isoforms. It plays a critical role during embryo
implantation by synthesizing network-forming complement during
early embryo development. Also, it has been found to elevate the trophoblast adhesion to the maternal extracellular matrix and then decidua in endometrium, which further promote proliferation and differentiation of trophoblast when interacts with integrin receptors. In a
study conducted by Inagaki and coworkers, they found signiﬁcant association between IgG anti-laminin-1 antibodies and infertile patients
with endometriosis for stage II or more. [132] The same group also
demonstrated that anti-laminin-1 antibodies are signiﬁcantly higher in
women with recurrent miscarriage when compared with healthy controls, which causes a disruption in early reproductive stages by interfering with embryogenesis and placental development. [133,134]
Moreover anti-laminin-1 in follicular ﬂuid was noted to be related with
oocyte maturation, it aﬀected oocyte quality resulting in reduced fertility. [135,132] It was demonstrated that these antibodies may directly
interfere with the function of laminin-1 to disrupt early reproductive
stages and be involved in the development of EMS. In light of these
ﬁndings, anti-laminin-1 antibodies might be clinically important in
development of autoimmune-mediated reproductive failure and the
antibody assessment may provide a novel non-invasive diagnosis of
EMS [136].

8. Impact of immunological dysfunction on endometriosis
associated infertility
The pathophysiology of EMS involves chronic dysregulation of inﬂammatory and vascular signaling.
Galectin-1 and -3 are overexpressed in various forms of endometriotic tissues. Galectins belong to a subfamily of lectins and
regulate a wide variety of key biological processes, such as cell growth,
proliferation and diﬀerentiation, apoptosis, but are also pivotal in immune responses since they regulate host-pathogen interactions, acute
and chronic inﬂammation, and immune tolerance [111, 156–160].
Higher galectin-3 concentrations are also detected in peritoneal
ﬂuid samples from women with EMS than from controls [161,162] and
galectin-1 is strongly expressed by human uterine natural killer (uNK)
cells compared to peripheral blood NK cells (pNK). These CD56+galectin-1+uNK cells comprise ~70% of maternal leukocytes at the implantation site, promote angiogenesis and trophoblast invasion [163,
164].
Along the way, other autoantibodies have also been found in infertile women with EMS undergoing assisted reproduction. A retrospective study tested the eﬀect of circulating IgG, IgM and IgA isotype
antibodies to cardiolipin, phosphatidylserine (PS), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylglycerol (PG), phosphatidylinositol (PI),
phosphatic acid (PA), histone 2A (H2A) and 2B (H2B) fractions, singlestranded DNA (ssDNA) and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) in women
with and without endometriosis on IVF outcome. [165] The result
showed three or more positive autoantibodies were detected in 50% of
patients with EMS and the pregnancy rates in autoantibody-positive
group and autoantibody-negative group was 23% and 46%, respectively. [165] Importantly, administration of corticosteroid for patients
with autoantibodies improved the pregnancy rate. [165] A similar
study analyzed the presence of several diﬀerent antinuclear antibodies
(ANA), antiphospholipid antibodies (APA), antithyroid antibodies
(ATA) and lupus anticoagulant in infertile women with recurrent
pregnancy loss. [166] The result showed that positive rate of autoantibodies was similar in women with reproductive failure and EMS,
which is higher than fertile controls. [166] Based on these evidences,
autoantibodies could be a potential monitoring marker in infertility and
recurrent miscarriage associated with EMS.

7. Role of autoimmune-related genetics in endometriosis
There is accumulating evidence to support the etiology of EMS as an
epigenetic disease, even if remains to be studied the role of epigenetic
factors in the development of EMS. DNA methylation (hypo or hypermethylation) plays an important role in cellular processes and regulation of gene expression and a number of aberrantly expressed genes
reported in EMS, such as aromatase (key molecule for estrogen production), E.cadherin, Steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) and others are related to aberrant DNA methylation. [137,138] Common genetic polymorphisms related in immune system were both detected in EMS and
AD, including region in the genes of FOXP3, FCRL3, NF-κB and B lymphocyte stimulator. [139] Fc receptor-like 3 (FCRL3) gene encodes a
glycoprotein belonging to the immunoglobulin receptor superfamily. It
plays a role in B cells diﬀerentiation into autoreactive cells through the
modulation of signal transduction via activation/inactivation of signaling tyrosine protein kinases. [140] As reported by Bianco et al.,
[141] FCRL3-169C/T was signiﬁcantly associated with risk of endometriosis regardless of the stage of the disease. [141] Also, the
FCRL3-169C allele was found to be correlated with an increased production of autoantibodies. [142] NF-κB, a major transcription factor of
immune response leading to cell apoptosis and growth. It was reported
to play an important role to mediate anti-apoptosis, growth of endometriotic cells, invasion, angiogenesis and cytokine production in
EMS [143] and recently, a common insertion/deletion polymorphism
(-94 insertion/deletion ATTG) in the NF-κB gene was identiﬁed in SLE
950

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

T. Zhang et al.

9. Current therapies for EMS

isolated from peripheral blood (T lymphocytes, NK cells) [179–180]
and the women aﬀected show dysfunctional, increased accumulation of
regulatory T suppressor cells all factors able to favor chronic inﬂammation and promote initiation and progression of EMS associated
ovarian cancer. Etanercept, a TNF-α blocker, a potential immunomodulatory agents was used in a baboon model, and led to a
statistically signiﬁcant decrease in red lesion surface area in the treatment group with a trend toward a decrease in the absolute number of
red lesions. [181] Another immunomodulator (loxoribine) caused a
reduction in NK cells and endometriotic lesions in a rat model [182]
and a similar reduction of endometriotic lesions was observed with lipoxin, [183,184] rapamycin, [185] and pentoxifylline. [186] A Cochrane review [187] evaluated four clinical trials, and demonstrated a
lack of evidence to recommend pentoxifylline for pain relief or to improve the chances of spontaneous pregnancies. So, even if these novel
therapeutic agents appear promising on the treatment of EMS, further
studies from multi-center clinical trials are still needed prior to be recommended as a routine regime for women with EMS. [187] In the last
few decades, numerous studies have investigated the link between vitamin D (VD) (1,25(OH)2D3) and the incidence and severity of AD.
[188] VD is is a steroid hormone that, in addition to its actions on
calcium and bone metabolism, exhibits a plethora of regulatory eﬀects
on immune cells. [189] Active VD can work as a positive immunomodulator on both the innate and adaptive immune responses
[190] and hypovitaminosis D is highly prevalent in autoimmune diseases and correlate with disease activity and comorbidities. [190] VD
exerts a broad range of biological activities since “…a lack of vitamin D
renders patients liable to the development of an autoimmune disease.”
[190] In recent years, accumulating evidences showed that VD supplementation could be used as an immunomodulator for managing also
EMS, since EMS shares some characteristics with AD, [11] and inﬂammatory changes in the peritoneal cavity may be associated with
lesion development. Furthermore other comorbid AD (i.e., systemic
lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis)
[123,124] can coincide with the presence of EMS. [191,192] Mariani
et al. [193] and other groups [194] have demonstrated that rodents
supplemented with 1,25(OH)2D3 showed a regression of endometriotic
lesion by signiﬁcantly reducing VEGF and MMP-9, and increasing
MMP-2 inhibitors. [195] Therefore VD might be a novel therapeutic
approach for managing EMS as an AD through its immunomodulatory
and anti-inﬂammatory properties. Importantly, dairy products rich in
calcium and VD have been linked to lower the risk of developing EMS in
humans [196].
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), derivative of Chloroquine, ﬁrstly used
to treat malaria, is an eﬀective therapeutic agent for a range of autoimmune disorders non-organ speciﬁc, such as SLE, rheumatoid arthritis,
and mixed connective tissue disorders. [197] HCQ can antagonize
communication among cells in the immune system that are inappropriately activated, and recently Ruiz et al. [23] identiﬁed HCQ as
a potential new non-hormonal treatment demonstrating the therapeutic
eﬀects on human endometriotic cells in an established mouse model of
EMS.
Also a wide variety of antiangiogenic agents has been evaluated in
vitro as potential treatments for EMS. These include growth factor inhibitors, endogenous angiogenesis inhibitors, fumagillin analogues,
statins, cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors, phytochemical compounds, immunomodulators, dopamine agonists, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists, progestins, danazol, and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists. However, clinical evidence for the
eﬃcacy and safety of most of them is still lacking [198,199].
Recent data have linked disorders of the C system activation and
pathogenesis of EMS. [200] Under normal circumstances, C activation
is tightly controlled by several regulatory proteins to minimize host
tissue damage. In the available literature, there is no information about
the role of C1q and C1INH in the formation and development of EMS.
C1INH has been shown to inhibit the C safely and an impairment in the

Despite a range of symptoms, diagnosis of EMS is often delayed due
to lack of non invasive, deﬁnitive and consistent biomarkers and until
now the visual inspection of the pelvis at laparoscopy with histologic
conﬁrmation is the gold standard for diagnosis of EMS. [167,168]
Furthermore all currently available treatments of EMS are suppressive,
not curative. They are associated with the temporary relief of symptoms
during treatment. On treatment discontinuation, recurrence of the
symptoms is the rule. For instance, EMS-associated pain can continue
after medical treatment or conservative surgery. The current treatment
options for EMS-associated pain are contraceptive rather than fertilitypromoter therapy. Women desirous of pregnancy who have painful
EMS, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) appear to be the
only medical option consistent with the maintenance of fertility with a
pretreatment with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH).
10. Hormonal therapies
GnRH agonists are usually the ﬁrst-line agents because they are
highly eﬀective at suppressing ovarian hormone production and able to
inhibit the growth of the extrapelvic endometrial tissue. Failure of
medical treatment is frequently encountered with these aggressive
disease phenotypes. [169] Selective progesterone receptor modulators
(SPRM) can have variable eﬀects on progesterone receptors from different tissues, ranging from being a pure agonist or a mixed agonist/
antagonist to a pure antagonist. Mifepristone (RU486) was shown to
have a positive eﬀect on pain symptoms. [170,171] Ulipristal acetate
and asoprisnil are other members of the same family but feasibility of
ulipristal acetate and others SPRM for the treatment of EMS has yet to
be determined. Raloxifene, a commercially available selective estrogen
receptor modulator (SERM), has been used for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. Raloxifene was tested at various doses in a rat
model of EMS and was shown to have an estrogen-antagonist eﬀect in
rat uterine tissue [172] but the eﬀectiveness on EMS in humans has yet
to be evaluated. Aromatase inhibitors are a treatment option that
usually is reserved for managing severe, intractable EMS- associated
pain in combination therapy with oral contraceptive pills, progestins,
and GnRH analogues and patients should be counseled about the oﬀlabel nature of its use for endometriosis-associated pain. [173] Nevertheless these treatment remains suboptimal owing to the side eﬀects,
e.g. hypoestrogenic condition, and unsatisfactory outcomes to restore
fertility.
11. Non hormonal treatments: immunomodulatory therapies
Many studies have evaluated the diagnostic value of biomarkers of
EMS, but no data on recommended biomarkers in endometrial tissue,
menstrual or uterine ﬂuids and immunologic markers in blood or urine
for clinical use as a diagnostic test for EMS. Recently Vodolazkaia A
et al, [174] selected a diagnostic panel of four biomarkers (annexin V,
VEGF, CA-125 and sICAM-1/glycodelin) in plasma samples obtained
during menstruation. A multivariate analysis could predict US-negative
endometriosis with a sensitivity of 81– 90% and a speciﬁcity of 63 –
81%. [174] The relevance of this selected diagnostic panel (annexin V,
VEGF, CA-125 and sICAM-1/glycodelin) is conﬁrmed by the fact that
these biomarkers are involved in apoptosis, angiogenesis, adhesion and
tumorogenesis, which are highly related to the pathogenesis of EMS.
[174,175] However, although EMS remains largely benign, malignant
transformation may occur in up to 1% of cases, most commonly from
ovarian lesions, [176] and this transformation could be due to a culmination of a multifaceted complex of pathogenic factors in conjunction with endocrine imbalance and oxidative stress and immune surveillance dysregulation. [177] In women with EMS most of the studies
have focused on secreted chemokine proﬁle [178] or immune cells
resident in the peritoneal ﬂuid (macrophages and NK cells) and/ or
951

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

T. Zhang et al.

activity and concentration of C1INH can cause such diseases as hereditary angioedema (HANE), deﬁned as a local, noninﬂammatory, selflimiting edema or the systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). [201] One
of the mainstays in long term management of HANE is long-term
therapy with danazol, a mild androgen capable of correcting low Cl INH
concentrations and of almost completely putting into remission the
typical symptoms of the disease, [202] and is capable to improve
ovarian condition in HANE. [203] Another important hormonal therapy
for EMS, GnRH agonists, can modulate serum C function in vivo [204]
and GnRH agonists were used also in long term prophylaxis of HANE
attacks. [205] Furthermore C pathway was demonstrated associated
with all gene expression changes (benign EMS, atypical EMS and EMS
associated ovarian cancer) [104] so these ﬁndings reveal that chronic
inﬂammation in EMS is dominated by C system activation and suggest a
link between initiating events and immune surveillance via C. New
therapies could point also to this pathway as a potential target for early
prevention of EMS.

with endometriosis. Fertil Sterility 2000;74:760–6.
[13] Jones RK, Searle RF, Bulmer JN. Apoptosis and bcl-2 expression in normal human
endometrium, endometriosis and adenomyosis. Hum Reprod 1998;13:3496–502.
[14] Jabbour HN, Kelly RW, Fraser HM, Critchley HO. Endocrine regulation of menstruation. Endocr Rev 2006;27:17–46.
[15] Levine B, Klionsky DJ. Development by self-digestion: molecular mechanisms and
biological functions of autophagy. Dev Cell 2004;6:463–77.
[16] Choi J, Jo M, Lee E, Oh YK, Choi D. The role of autophagy in human endometrium.
Biol Reprod 2012;86:1–10.
[17] Levine B, Yuan J. Autophagy in cell death: an innocent convict? J Clin Invest
2005;115:2679–88.
[18] Maiuri C, Zalckvar E, Kimchi A, Kroemer G. Self-eating and self-killing: crosstalk
between autophagy and apoptosis. Nature Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007;8:741–52.
[19] Gozuacik D, Kimchi A. Autophagy and cell death. Curr Top Dev Biol
2007;78:217–45.
[20] Mizushima N, Levine B, Cuervo AM, Klions DJ. Autophagy ﬁghts disease through
cellular self-digestion. Nature 2008;F 451:1069–75.
[21] Yang Hui-Li, Me Jie, Chang Kai-Kai, Zhou Wen-Jie, Huang Li-Qing, Li Ming-Qing.
Autophagy in endometriosis. Am J Transl Res 2017;9(11):4707–25.
[22] Mei J, Zhu XY, Jin LP, Duan ZL, Li DJ, Li MQ. Hum Reprod 2015;30:1677–89.
[23] Ruiz A, Rockﬁeld S, Taran N, Haller E, Engelman RW, Flores I, et al. Eﬀect of
hydroxychloroquine and characterization of autophagy in a mouse model of endometriosis. Cell Death Dis 2016;7:2059.
[24] Soares MP, Bach FH. Heme oxygenase-1: from biology to therapeutic potential.
Trends Mol Med 2009;15:50–8.
[25] Vousden KH, Prives C. Blinded by the light: the growing complexity of p53. Cell
2009;137:413–31.
[26] Bacci M, Capobianco A, Monno A, Cottone L, Di Puppo F, Camisa B, et al.
Macrophages are alternatively activated in patients with endometriosis and required for growth and vascularization of lesions in a mouse model of disease. Am J
Pathol 2009;175:547–56.
[27] Chuang PC, Wu MH, Shoji Y, Tsai SJ. Downregulation of CD36 results in reduced
phagocytic ability of peritoneal macrophages of women with endometriosis. J
Pathol 2009;219:232–41.
[28] Akoum A, Kong J, Metz C. Beaumont MC spontaneous and stimulated secretion of
monocyte chemotactic protein-1 and macrophage migration inhibitory factor by
peritoneal macrophages in women with and without endometriosis. Fertil Steril
2002;77:989–94.
[29] Brocker C, Thompson D, Matsumoto A, Nebert DW, Vasiliou V. Evolutionary divergence and functions of the human interleukin (IL) gene family. Human Genom.
2010;5:30–55.
[30] Hanada T, Tsuji S, Nakayama M, Wakinoue S, Kasahara K, Kimura F, et al.
Suppressive regulatory T cells and latent transforming growth factor-beta-expressing macrophages are altered in the peritoneal ﬂuid of patients with endometriosis. RB&E 2018;16:1–8.
[31] Yu JJ, Sun HT, Zhang ZF, Shi RX, Liu LB, Shang WL, et al. IL15 promotes growth
and invasion of endometrial stromal cells and inhibits killing activity of NK cells in
endometriosis. Reproduction 2016;152:151–60.
[32] Gonzalez-Foruria I, Santulli P, Chouzenoux S, Carmona F, Batteux F, Chapron C.
Soluble ligands for the NKG2D receptor are released during endometriosis and
correlate with disease severity. PloS One 2015;10:1–15.
[33] De Barros IBL, Malvezzi H, Gueuvoghlanian-Silva BY, Piccinato CA, Rizzo LV,
Podgaec S. What do we know about regulatory T cells and endometriosis? A systematic review. J Reprod Immunol 2017;120:48–55.
[34] Zhang RJ, Wild RA, Ojago JM. Eﬀect of tumor necrosis factor-alpha on adhesion of
human endometrial stromal cells to peritoneal mesothelial cells: an in vitro system.
Fertil Steril 1993;59:1196–201.
[35] Siristatidis C, Nissotakis C, Chrelias C, Iacovidou H, Salamalekis E. Immunological
factors and their role in the genesis and development of endometriosis. J Obstet
Gynaecol Res 2006;32:162–70.
[36] Lebovic DI, Bentzien F, Chao VA, Garrett EN, Meng YG, Taylor RN. Induction of an
angiogenic phenotype in endometriotic stromal cell cultures by interleukin-1beta.
Mol Hum Reprod 2000;6:269–75.
[37] Lebovic DI, Mueller MD, Taylor RN. Immunobiology of endometriosis. Fertil Steril
2001;75:1–10.
[38] Yoshino O, Izumi G, Shi J, Osuga Y, Hirota Y, Hirata T, et al. Activin-A is induced
by interleukin-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha and enhances the mRNA
expression of interleukin-6 and protease-activated receptor-2 and proliferation of
stromal cells from endometrioma. Fertil Steril 2011;96:118–21.
[39] Daniel Y, Geva E, Amit A, Eshed-Englender T, Baram A, Fait G, et al. Do soluble
cell adhesion molecules play a role in endometriosis? Am J Reprod Immunol
2000;43:160–6.
[40] Vigano P, Gaﬀuri B, Somigliana E, Busacca M, Di Blasio AM, Vignali M. Expression
of intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 mRNA and protein is enhanced in
endometriosis versus endometrial stromal cells in culture. Mol Hum Reprod
1998;4:1150–6.
[41] Senturk LM, Arici A. Immunology of endometriosis. J Reprod Immunol
1999;43:67–83.
[42] Sikora J, Smycz-Kubanska M, Mielczarek-Palacz A, Kondera-Anasz Z. Abnormal
peritoneal regulation of chemokine activation-The role of IL-8 in pathogenesis of
endometriosis. Am J Reprod Immunol 2017;77:e12622.
[43] Rana N, Braun DP, House R, Gebel H, Rotman C, Dmowski WP. Basal and stimulated secretion of cytokines by peritoneal macrophages in women with endometriosis. Fertil Steril 1996;65:925–30.
[44] Ulukus M, Ulukus EC, Tavmergen Goker EN, Tavmergen E, Zheng W, Arici A.
Expression of interleukin-8 and monocyte chemotactic protein 1 in women with

12. Conclusions
EMS, still incurable and common disease, that impacts the quality of
life, represents a unique immunological scenario. The aberrant changes
in cellular immune response and its cytokines are found to be related to
the pathophysiology (immune escape, adhesion, invasion, angiogenesis
and proliferation). Also, the presence of autoantibodies is another
consequence of dysfunction of immune system. These immunological
alterations cause decreased fecundity or even infertility by aﬀecting
endometrial receptivity, follicular ﬂuid, sperm mobility and embryo
cytotoxicity.
Although EMS is still not deﬁned speciﬁcally as an AD, both diseases
share several similar characteristics, such as female (and hormonal)
predominance, genetic polymorphisms, immunological abnormalities
and chronic condition. Diagnostic delays are common and may lead to a
decline in reproductive potential and fertility, therefore more research
is needed in this area of medicine.
Recently potential biomarkers including cytokines and autoantibodies are developing promisingly for use in early screening, to
reduce late diagnosis and the cost of surgical intervention, but also new
therapeutic strategies able to provide long-term beneﬁt and ameliorate
fertility in these women.
References
[1] Bulun SE. Endometriosis. New Engl J Med 2009;360:268–79.
[2] Mathias SD, Kuppermann M, Liberman RF, Lipschutz RC, Steege JF. Chronic pelvic
pain: Prevalence, health-related quality of life, and economic correlates. Obstet
Gynecol 1996;87:321–7.
[3] Koninckx PR, Meuleman C, Demeyere S, Lesaﬀre E, Cornillie FJ. Suggestive evidence that pelvic endometriosis is a progressive disease, whereas deeply inﬁltrating endometriosis is associated with pelvic pain. Fertil Steril
1991;55:759–65.
[4] Barnhart K, Dunsmoor-Su R, Coutifaris C. Eﬀect of endometriosis on in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 2002;77:1148–55.
[5] Sampson JA. Metastatic or embolic endometriosis, due to the menstrual dissemination of endometrial tissue into the venous circulation. Am J Pathol
1927;93:110–43.
[6] Halme J, Becker S, Wing R. Accentuated cyclic activation of peritoneal macrophages in patients with endometriosis. Am J Obst Gynecol 1984;148:85–90.
[7] Olovsson M. Immunological aspects of endometriosis: an update. Am J Reprod
Immunol 2011(Suppl. 166):101–4.
[8] Kanzaki H, Nakajima T, Yoshimura T. Immunological aspects of endometriosis,
Nihon rinsho. Jpn J Clin Med 2001;59(Suppl. 1):44–7.
[9] Sidell N, Han SW and Parthasarathy S, Regulation and modulation of abnormal
immune responses in endometriosis, Ann NY Acad Sci. 2002, 955:159-73 (discussion 199-200), 396-406.
[10] Matarese G, De Placido G, Nikas Y, Alviggi C. Pathogenesis of endometriosis:
natural immunity dysfunction or autoimmune disease? Trends Mol Med
2003;9:223–8.
[11] Nothnick WB. Treating endometriosis as an autoimmune disease. Fertil Steril
2001;76:223–31.
[12] Meresman GF, Vighi S, Buquet RA, Contreras-Ortiz O, Tesone M, Rumi LS.
Apoptosis and expression of Bcl-2 and Bax in eutopic endometrium from women

952

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

T. Zhang et al.

[75] Yu JJ, Sun HT, Zhang ZF, Shi RX, Liu LB, Shang WH, et al. IL15 promotes growth
and invasion of endometrial stromal cells and inhibits killing activity of NK cells in
endometriosis. Reproduction 2016;152:151–60.
[76] Du Y, Liu X, Guo SW. Platelets impair natural killer cell reactivity and function in
endometriosis through multiple mechanisms. Hum Reprod 2017;32:794–810.
[77] Guo SW, Ding D, Liu X. Anti-platelet therapy is eﬃcacious in treating endometriosis induced in mouse. Reprod Biomed Online 2016;33:484–99.
[78] Giuliani E, Parkin KL, Lessey BA, Young SL, Fazleabas AT. Characterization of
uterine NK cells in women with infertility or recurrent pregnancy loss and associated endometriosis. Am J Reprod Immunol 2014;72:262–9.
[79] Zhang T, Zhou J, Man GCW, Leung KT, Liang B, Xiao B, et al. MDSCs drive the
process of endometriosis by enhancing angiogenesis and are a new potential
therapeutic target. Eur J Immunol 2018;48(6):1059–73.
[80] Bronte V, Brandau S, Chen SH, Colombo MP, Frey AB, Greten TF, et al.
Recommendations for myeloid-derived suppressor cell nomenclature and characterization standards. Nat Commun 2016;6(7):1–10.
[81] Fleming V, Hu X, Weber R, Nagibin V, Groth C, Altevogt P, et al. Targeting
myeloid-derived suppressor cells to bypass tumor-induced immunosuppression.
Front Immunol 2018;9(398):1–11.
[82] Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Sinha P. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells: linking inﬂammation and cancer. J Immunol 2009;182:4499–506.
[83] Luan Y, Mosheir E, Menon MC, Wilson D, Woytovich C, Ochando J, et al.
Monocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells accumulate in renal transplant patients and mediate CD4(+) Foxp3(+) Treg expansion. Am J Transplant
2013;13(12):3123–31.
[84] Huang B, Pan PY, Li Q, Sato AI, Levy DE, Bromberg J, et al. Gr-1+CD115+ immature myeloid suppressor cells mediate the development of tumor-induced T
regulatory cells and T-cell anergy in tumor-bearing host. Cancer Res
2006;15(66(2)):1123–31.
[85] Elkabets M, Ribeiro VS, Dinarello CA, Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Di Santo SJ, Apte RN,
et al. IL-1beta regulates a novel myeloid-derived suppressor cell subset that impairs NK cell development and function. Eur J Immunol 2010;40(12):3347–57.
[86] Li H, Han Y, Guo Q, Zhang M, Cao X. Cancer-expanded myeloid-derived suppressor
cells induce anergy of NK cells through membrane-bound TGF-beta 1. J Immunol
2009;182:240–9.
[87] Kusmartsev S, Gabrilovich DI. STAT1 signaling regulates tumor-associated macrophage-mediated T cell deletion. J Immunol 2005;174:4880–91.
[88] Corzo CA, Condamine T, Lu L, Cotter MJ, Youn JI, Cheng P, et al. HIF-1alpha
regulates function and diﬀerentiation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in the
tumor microenvironment. J Exp Med 2010;207:2439–53.
[89] Akoum A, Lemay A, McColl S, Turcot-Lemay L, Maheux R. Elevated concentration
and biologic activity of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 in the peritoneal ﬂuid of
patients with endometriosis. Fertil Steril 1996;66:17–23.
[90] Tsukada K, Katoh H, Shiojima M, Suzuki T, Takenoshita S, Nagamachi Y.
Concentrations of cytokines in peritoneal ﬂuid after abdominal surgery. Eur J Surg
1993;159(9):475–9.
[91] Akoum A, Lemay A, Brunet C, Hebert J. Secretion of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 by cytokine-stimulated endometrial cells of women with endometriosis Le
groupe d'investigation en gynecologie. Fertil Steril 1995;63:322–8.
[92] Hornung D, Ryan IP, Chao VA, Vigne JL, Schriock ED, Taylor RN.
Immunolocalization and regulation of the chemokine RANTES in human endometrial and endometriosis tissues and cells. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
1997;82(5):1621–8.
[93] Li MQ, Li HP, Meng YH, Wang XQ, Zhu XY, Mei J, et al. Chemokine CCL2 enhances
survival and invasiveness of endometrial stromal cells in an autocrine manner by
activating Akt and MAPK/Erk1/2 signal pathway. Fertil Steri 2012;97:919–29.
[94] Wieser F, Yu J, Park J, Gaeddert A, Cohen M, Vigne JL, et al. A botanical extract
from channel ﬂow inhibits cell proliferation, induces apoptosis, and suppresses
CCL5 in human endometriotic stromal cells. Biol Reprod. 2009;81(2):371–7.
[95] Christodoulakos C, Augoulea A, Lambrinoudaki I, Sioulas V, Creatsas G.
Pathogenesis of endometriosis: the role of defective 'immunosurveillance'. Eur J
Contracept Reprod Health Care 2007 Sep;12(3):194–202.
[96] Lessey BA, Castelbaum AJ, Sawin SW, Buck CA, Schinnar R, Biker W, et al.
Aberrant integrin expression in the endometrium of women with endometriosis. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;79:643–9.
[97] McLaren J. Vascular endothelial growth factor and endometriotic angiogenesis.
Hum Reprod Update 2000;6:45–55.
[98] Kim JG, Suh CS, Kim SH, Choi YM, Moon SY, Lee JY. Insulin-like growth factors
(IGFs), IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs), and IGFBP-3 protease activity in the peritoneal ﬂuid of patients with and without endometriosis. Fertil Steril
2000;73:996–1000.
[99] Halme J, White C, Kauma S, Estes J, Haskill S. Peritoneal macrophages from patients with endometriosis release growth factor activity in vitro. JCEM
1988;66:1044–9.
[100] Wei Q. St. Clair JB, Fu T, Stratton P, Nieman LK. Reduced expression of biomarkers
associated with the implantation window in women with endometriosis. Fertil
Steril 2009;91(5):1686–91.
[101] Aznaurova YB, Zhumataev MB, Roberts TK, Aliper AM, Zhavoronkov AA.
Molecular aspects of development and regulation of endometriosis. Reprod Biol
Endocrinol 2014;12(50). https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-7827-12-50.
[102] Blom M. The role of complement inhibitors beyond controlling inﬂammation. J
Intern Med 2017;282:116–28.
[103] Lubbers R, van Essen MF, van Kooten C. Trouw LA Production of complement
components by cells of the immune system. Clin Exp Immunol 2017;188:183–91.
[104] Suryawanshi S, Huang X, Elishaev E, Budiu RA, Zhang L, Kim SH, et al.
Complement pathway is frequently altered in endometriosis and endometriosis-

endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2009;91:687–93.
[45] McLaren J. Vascular endothelial growth factor and endometriotic angiogenesis.
Hum Reprod Update 2000;6:45–55.
[46] Sakaguchi S, Yamaguchi T, Nomura T, Ono M. Regulatory T cells and immune
tolerance. Cell 2008;133:775–87.
[47] Curiel TJ, Coukos G, Zou L, Alvarez X, Cheng P, Mottram P, et al. Speciﬁc recruitment of regulatory T cells in ovarian carcinoma fosters immune privilege and
predicts reduced survival. Nat Med 2004;10:942–9.
[48] Ehrenstein MR, Evans JG, Singh A, Moore S, Warnes G, Isenberg DA, et al.
Compromised function of regulatory T cells in rheumatoid arthritis and reversal by
anti-TNFalpha therapy. J Exp Med 2004;200:277–85.
[49] Miyara M, Amoura Z, Parizot C, Badoual C, Dorgham K, Trad S, et al. Global
natural regulatory T cell depletion in active systemic lupus erythematosus. J
Immunol 2005;175:8392–4.
[50] Buckner JH. Mechanisms of impaired regulation by CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ regulatory T cells in human autoimmune diseases. Rev Immunol 2010;10(12):849–59.
[51] Maridas DE, Hey-Cunningham AJ, Ng CHM, Markham R, Fraser IS, Berbic M.
Peripheral and endometrial dendritic cell populations during the normal cycle and
in the presence of endometriosis. J Endometr Pelvic Pain Disord
2014;6(2):67–119.
[52] Gogacz M, Winkler I, Bojarska-Junak A, Tabarkiewicz J, Semczuk A, Rechberger T,
et al. T regulatory lymphocytes in patients with endometriosis. Mol Med Rep
2014;10:1072–6.
[53] Olkowska-Truchanowicz J, Bocian K, Maksym RB, Bialoszewska A, Wlodarczyk D,
Baranowski W, et al. CD4(+) CD25(+) FOXP3(+) regulatory T cells in peripheral
blood and peritoneal ﬂuid of patients with endometriosis. Hum Reprod
2013;28:119–24.
[54] Takamura M, Koga K, Izumi G, Hirata T, Harada M, Hirota Y, et al. Simultaneous
detection and evaluation of four subsets of CD4+ T lymphocyte in lesions and
peripheral blood in endometriosis. Am J Reprod Immunol 2015;74:480–6.
[55] Hori S, Nomura T, Hori S, Nomura T, Sakaguchi S. Control of regulatory T cell
development by the transcription factor Foxp3. Science 2003;299:1057–61.
[56] Andre GM, Barbosa CP, Teles JS, Vilarino FL, Christofolini DM, Bianco B. Analysis
of FOXP3 polymorphisms in infertile women with and without endometriosis.
Fertil Steril 2011;95:2223–7.
[57] Li MQ, Wang Y, Chang KK, Meng YH, Liu LB, Mei J, et al. CD4+Foxp3+ regulatory T cell diﬀerentiation mediated by endometrial stromal cell-derived TECK
promotes the growth and invasion of endometriotic lesions. Cell Death Dis
2014;5(10):e1436.
[58] Harada T, Iwabe T, Terakawa N. Role of cytokines in endometriosis. Fertil Steril
2001;76:1–10.
[59] Yoshimura A, Wakabayashi Y, Mori T. Cellular and molecular basis for the regulation of inﬂammation by TGF-beta. J Biochem 2010;147:781–92.
[60] Hanada T, Tsuji S, Nakayama M, Wakinoue S, Kasahara K, Kimura F, et al.
Suppressive regulatory T cells and latent transforming growth factor-β-expressing
macrophages are altered in the peritoneal ﬂuid of patients with endometriosis.
Reprod Biol Endocrin 2018;16:9.
[61] Schulke L, Berbic M, Manconi F, Tokushige N, Markham R, Fraser IS. Dendritic
cellpopulations in the eutopic and ectopic endometrium of women with endometriosis. Hum Reprod 2009;24:1695–703.
[62] Izumi G, Koga K, Takamura M, Makabe T, Nagai M, Urata Y, et al. Mannose receptor is highly expressed by peritoneal dendritic cells in endometriosis. Fertil
Steril 2017;107:167–73.
[63] Kerrigan AM, Brown GD. C-type lectins and phagocytosis. Immunobiol
2009;214:562–75.
[64] Fainaru O, Adini A, Benny O, Adini I, Short S, Bazinet L, et al. Dendritic cells
support angiogenesis and promote lesion growth in a murine model of endometriosis. FASEB J 2008;22:522–9.
[65] Pencovich N, Luk J, Hantisteanu S, Hornstein MD, Fainaru O. The development of
endometriosis in a murine model is dependent on the presence of dendritic cells.
Reprod Biomed Online 2014;28:515–21.
[66] Stanic AK, Kim M, Styer AK, Rueda BR. Dendritic cells attenuate the early establishment of endometriosis-like lesions in a murine model. Reprod Sci
2014;21:1228–36.
[67] Wilson TJ, Hertzog PJ, Angus D, Munnery L, Wood EC, Kola I. Decreased natural
killer cell activity in endometriosis patients: relationship to disease pathogenesis.
Fertil Steril 1994;62:1086–8.
[68] Tanaka E, Sendo F, Kawagoe S, Hiroi M. Decreased natural killer cell activity in
women with endometriosis. Gynecol Obst Invest 1992;34:27–30.
[69] Oosterlynck DJ, Cornillie FJ, Waer M, Vandeputte M, Koninckx PR. Women with
endometriosis show a defect in natural killer activity resulting in a decreased cytotoxicity to autologous endometrium. Fertil Steril 1991;56:45–51.
[70] Gogacz M, Gałczyński K, Wojtaś M, Winkler I, Adamiak A, Romanek-Piva K, et al.
Fas-related apoptosis of peritoneal ﬂuid macrophages in endometriosis patients:
understanding the disease. J Immunol Res 2017:1–8.
[71] Angka L, Khan ST, Kilgour MK, Xu R, Kennedy MA, Auer RC. Dysfunctional natural
killer cells in the aftermath of cancer surgery. Int J Mol Sci 2017;18(178):1–20.
[72] Wu MY, Yang JH, Chao KH, Hwang JL, Yang YS, Ho HN. Increase in the expression
of killer cell inhibitory receptors on peritoneal natural killer cells in women with
endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2000;74:1187–91.
[73] Maeda N, Izumiya C, Yamamoto Y, Oguri H, Kusume T, Fukaya T. Increased killer
inhibitory receptor KIR2DL1 expression among natural killer cells in women with
pelvic endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2002;77:297–302.
[74] Kang YJ, Jeung IC, Park A, Park YJ, Jung H, Kim TD, et al. An increased level of IL6 suppresses NK cell activity in peritoneal ﬂuid of patients with endometriosis via
regulation of SHP-2 expression. Hum Reprod 2014;29:2176–89.

953

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

T. Zhang et al.

andtherapeutic target. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2011;37:683–95.
[138] Guo SW. Epigenetics of endometriosis. MHR: Basic Sci. Reprod. Med. 1 October
2009;15(10):587–607.
[139] Uimari O, Rahmioglu N, Nyholt DR, Vincent K, Missmer SA, Becker C, et al.
Genome-wide genetic analyses highlight mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling in the pathogenesis of endometriosis. Hum Reprod 2017;32(4):780–93.
[140] Chistiakov DA, Chistiakov AP. Is FCRL3 a new general autoimmunity gene?
Human Immunol 2007;68:375–83.
[141] Bianco B, Teles JS, Lerner TG, Vilarino FL, Christofolini DM, Barbosa CP.
Association of FCRL3 -169T/C polymorphism with endometriosis and identiﬁcation of a protective haplotype against the development of the disease in Brazilian
population. Human Immunol 2011;72:774–8.
[142] Owen CJ, Kelly H, Eden JA, Merriman ME, Pearce SH, Merriman TR. Analysis of
the Fc receptor-like-3 (FCRL3) locus in Caucasians with autoimmune disorders
suggests a complex pattern of disease association. JCEM 2007;92:1106–11.
[143] Gonzalez-Ramos R, Van Langendonckt A, Defrere S, Lousse JC, Colette S, Devoto L,
et al. Involvement of the nuclear factor-kappa B pathway in the pathogenesis of
endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2010;94:1985–94.
[144] Gao M, Wang CH, Sima X, Han XM. NFKB1 -94 insertion/deletion ATTG polymorphism contributes to risk of systemic lupus erythematosus. DNA Cell Biol
2012;31:611–5.
[145] Zhou B, Rao L, Peng Y, Wang Y, Qie M, Zhang Z, et al. A functional promoter
polymorphism in NFKB1 increases susceptibility to endometriosis. DNA Cell Biol
2010;29:235–9.
[146] Kong YC, Flynn JC, Banga JP, David CS. Application of HLA class II transgenic
mice to study autoimmune regulation. Thyroid 2007;17:995–1003.
[147] Ishii K, Takakuwa K, Adachi H, Higashino M, Hataya I, Tanaka K. Studies on the
human leukocyte antigen class I antigens in Japanese patients with macroscopically diagnosed endometriosis. Gynecol Obstet Invest 2002;54:150–3.
[148] Ishii K, Takakuwa K, Mitsui T, Tanaka K. Studies on the human leukocyte antigenDR in patients with endometriosis: genotyping of HLA-DRB1 alleles. Human
Reprod 2002;17:560–3.
[149] Kitawaki J, Obayashi H, Kado N, Ishihara H, Koshiba H, Maruya E, et al.
Association of HLA class I and class II alleles with susceptibility to endometriosis.
Human Immunol 2002;63:1033–8.
[150] Wang X, Liu C, Lin Q, Fang X, Lin L, Mei Q. Study on polymorphism of human
leukocyte antigen-DRB1 allele in patients with endometriosis. Zhonghua fu chan
ke za zhi 2002;37:346–8.
[151] Zong L, Pan D, Chen W, He Y, Liu Z, Lin J, et al. Comparative study of HLA-DQA1
and HLA-DRB1 allele in patients with endometriosis and adenomyosis. Chin J Med
Genet 2002;19:49–51.
[152] Zong L, He Y, Pan D. Association of human leukocyte antigen-DQA1 with endometriosis of women in southern China. Zhonghua fu chan ke za zhi
2001;36:405–7.
[153] Whang DH, Kim SH, Choi YM, Park MH, Noh JH, Kim YB. No association between
HLA-DRB1 alleles and susceptibility to advanced stage endometriosis in a Korean
population. Human Reprod 2006;21:129–33.
[154] Sundqvist J, Falconer H, Seddighzadeh M, Vodolazkaia A, Fassbender A, Kyama C,
et al. Endometriosis and autoimmune disease: association of susceptibility to
moderate/severe endometriosis with CCL21 and HLA-DRB1. Fertil Steril
2011;95:437–40.
[155] Roszkowski PI, Sankowska M, Jalbrzykowska A, Radomski D, Dragowska K, Ploski
R, et al. Susceptibility to ovarian endometriosis in Polish population is not associated with HLA-DRB1 alleles. Human Reprod 2005;20:970–3.
[156] Noël JC, Chapron C, Borghese B, Fayt I, Anaf V. Galectin-3 is overexpressed in
various forms of endometriosis. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol
2011;19:253–7.
[157] Bastón JI, Barañao RI, Ricci AG, et al. Targeting galectin-1-induced angiogenesis
mitigates the severity of endometriosis. J Pathol 2014;234:329–37.
[158] Dias Jr. JA, de Oliveira RM, Abrao MS. Antinuclear antibodies and endometriosis.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2006;93:262–3.
[159] Hever A, Roth RB, Hevezi P, Marin ME, Acosta JA, Acosta H, et al. Human endometriosis is associated with plasma cells and overexpression of B lymphocyte
stimulator. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:12451–6.
[160] Schiemann B, Gommerman JL, Vora K, Cachero TG, Shulga-Morskaya S, Dobles M,
et al. An essential role for BAFF in the normal development of B cells through a
BCMA-independent pathway. Science 2001;293:2111–4.
[161] Caserta D, Di Benedetto L, Bordi G, D’Ambrosio A, Moscarini M. Levels of galectin3 and stimulation expressed gene 2 in the peritoneal ﬂuid of women with endometriosis: a pilot study. Gynecol Endocrinol 2014;30:877–80.
[162] Vergetaki A, Jeschke U, Vrekoussis T, et al. Galectin-1 overexpression in endometriosis and its regulation by neuropeptides (CRH, UCN) indicating its important role in reproduction and inﬂammation. PLoS One 2014;9:1–17.
[163] Koopman LA, Kopcow HD, Rybalov B, et al. Human decidual natural killer cells
are a unique NKcell subset with immunomodulatory potential. J Exp Med
2003;198:1201–12.
[164] Than NG, Romero R, Balogh A, et al. Galectins: double-edged swords in the crossroads of pregnancy complications and female reproductive tract inﬂammation and
neoplasia. J Pathol Transl Med 2015 May;49(3):181–208.
[165] Dmowski WP, Rana N, Michalowska J, Friberg J, Papierniak C, El-Roeiy A. The
eﬀect of endometriosis, its stage and activity, and of autoantibodies on in vitro
fertilization and embryo transfer success rates. Fertil Steril 1995;63:555–62.
[166] Kaider AS, Kaider BD, Janowicz PB, Roussev RG. Immunodiagnostic evaluation in
women with reproductive failure. Am Journal Reprod Immunol 1999;42:335–46.
[167] Brown J, Farquhar C. An overview of treatments for endometriosis. JAMA
2015;313(3):296–7.

associated ovarian cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2014;1(20(23)):6163–74.
[105] Perricone R, De Carolis C, Moretti C, Santuari E, De Sanctis G, Fontana L.
Complement, complement activation and anaphylatoxins in human ovarian follicular ﬂuid. Clin Exp Immunol 1990;82(2):359–62.
[106] Sikora J, Wróblewska-Czech A, Smycz-Kubańska M, et al. The role of complement
components C1q, MBL and C1 inhibitor in pathogenesis of endometriosis. Arch
Gynecol Obstet 2018;297:1495–501.
[107] Eisenberg VH, Zolti M, Soriano D. Is there an association between autoimmunity
and endometriosis? Autoimmun Rev 2012;11(11):806–14.
[108] Startseva NV. Clinical immunological aspects of genital endometriosis.
Akusherstvo i ginekologiia 1980:23–6.
[109] Gleicher N, El-Roeiy A, Conﬁno E, Friberg J. Is endometriosis an autoimmune
disease? Obstet Gynecol 1987;70:115–22.
[110] Weed JC, Arquembourg PC. Endometriosis: can it produce an autoimmune response resulting in infertility? Clin Obst Gynecol 1980;23:885–93.
[111] Mathur S, Peress MR, Williamson HO, Youmans CD, Maney SA, Garvin AJ, et al.
Autoimmunity to endometrium and ovary in endometriosis. Clin Exp Immunol
1982;50:259–66.
[112] Fernandez-Shaw S, Hicks BR, Yudkin PL, Kennedy S, Barlow DH, Starkey PM. Antiendometrial and anti-endothelial auto-antibodies in women with endometriosis.
Hum Reprod 1993;8:310–5.
[113] Kennedy SH, Sargent IL, Starkey PM, Hicks BR, Barlow DH. Localization of antiendometrial antibody binding in women with endometriosis using a double-labelling immunohistochemical method. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97(8):671–4.
[114] Wild RA, Shivers CA. Antiendometrial antibodies in patients with endometriosis.
AJRIM 1985;8:84–6.
[115] Taylor PV, Maloney MD, Campbell JM, Skerrow SM, Nip MM, Parmar R, et al.
Autoreactivity in women with endometriosis. Br J Obstet Gynaecol
1991;98(7):680–4.
[116] Evers L, Dunselman GA, Van der Linden PJ. Markers for endometriosis. Bailliere's
Clin Obstetr Gynaecol 1993;7:15–39.
[117] Badaway SZ, Cuenca V, Freliech H, Stefanu C. Endometrial antibodies in serum
and peritoneal ﬂuid of infertile patients with and without endometriosis. Fertil
Steril 1990;53:930–2.
[118] Dias Jr. JA, de Oliveira RM, Abrao MS. Antinuclear antibodies and endometriosis.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2006;93(3):262–3.
[119] Sensky TE, Liu DT. Endometriosis: associations with menorrhagia, infertility and
oral contraceptives. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1980;17:573–6.
[120] Kalab P, Schultz RM, Kopf GS. Modiﬁcations of the mouse zona pellucida during
oocyte maturation: inhibitory eﬀects of follicular ﬂuid, fetuin, and alpha 2HSglycoprotein. Biol Reprod 1993;49:561–7.
[121] Alviggi C, Carrieri P, Pivonello R, et al. Association of pelvic endometriosis with
alopecia universalis, autoimmune thyroiditis and multiple sclerosis. J Endocrinol
Invest 2006;29(2):182–9.
[122] Baptist A, Baldwin J. Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis in a patient with endometriosis: case report and review of the literature. Clin Mol Allergy
2004;2(1):10.
[123] Katiyar A, Sharma S, Singh TP, Kaur P. Identiﬁcation of shared molecular signatures indicate the susceptibility of endometriosis to Multiple sclerosis. Front
Genet 2018;9:42. https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2018.00042.
[124] Harris HR, Costenbader KH, Mu F, Kvaskoﬀ M, Malspeis S, Karlson EW, et al.
Endometriosis and the risks of systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis in the Nurses’ Health Study II. Ann. the Rheum Dis. 2016;75(7):1279–84.
[125] Bahn RS. Autoimmunity and Graves’ disease. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2012;91:577–9.
[126] Kisiel B, Bednarczuk T, Kostrzewa G, et al. Polymorphism of the oestrogen receptor beta gene (ESR2) is associated with susceptibility to Graves’ disease. Clin
Endocrinol 2008;68:429–34.
[127] Yuk J-S, Park E-J, Seo Y-S, Kim HJ, Kwon S-Y, Park WI, et al. Medicine
2016;95(10):1–5.
[128] Hever RB, Roth P, Hevezi ME, Marin JA, Acosta H, Acosta J, et al. Human endometriosis is associated with plasma cells and overexpression of B lymphocyte
stimulator. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:12451–6.
[129] Groom JR, Fletcher CA, Walters SN, et al. BAFF and MyD88 signals promote a
lupuslike disease independent of T cells. J Exp Med 2007;204(8):1959–71.
[130] Lied GA, Lillestøl K, Valeur J, Berstad A. Intestinal B cell-activating factor: an
indicator of non-IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions to food? Aliment
Pharmacol Ther 2010;32(1):66–73.
[131] Vincent FB, Morand EF, Schneider P, Mackay F. The BAFF/APRIL system in SLE
pathogenesis. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2014;10(6):365–73.
[132] Inagaki J, Sugiura-Ogasawara M, Nomizu M, Nakatsuka M, Ikuta K, Suzuki N,
et al. An association of IgG anti-laminin-1 autoantibodies with endometriosis in
infertile patients. Hum Reprod 2003;18:544–9.
[133] Inagaki J, Kondo A, Lopez LR, Shoenfeld Y, Matsuura E. Pregnancy loss and endometriosis: pathogenic role of anti-laminin-1 autoantibodies. Ann NY Acad Sci
2005;1051:174–84.
[134] Inagaki E, Matsuura M, Nomizu M, Sugiura-Ogasawara K, Katano K, Kaihara K,
et al. IgG anti-laminin-1 autoantibody and recurrent miscarriages. Am J Reprod
Immunol 2001;45:232–8.
[135] Caccavo D, Pellegrino NM, Totaro I, Vacca MP, Selvaggi L, Depalo R. Anti-laminin1 antibodies in sera and follicular ﬂuid of women with endometriosis undergoing
in vitro fertilization. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 2011;24:481–8.
[136] Inagaki J, Kondo A, Lopez LR, Shoenfeld Y, Matsuura E. Anti-laminin-1 autoantibodies, pregnancy loss and endometriosis. Clin Dev Immunol 2004;11(34):261–6.
[137] Nasu K, Kawano Y, Tsukamoto Y, Takano M, Takai N, Li H, et al. Aberrant DNA
methylation status of endometriosis: epigenetics as the pathogenesis, biomarker

954

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 945–955

T. Zhang et al.

2010;93:1316–23.
[187] Lu D, Song H, Li Y, Clarke J, Shi G. Pentoxifylline for endometriosis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2012(1). https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD007677.pub3.
(Art. No.: CD007677).
[188] Dankers W, Colin EM, van Hamburg JP, Lubberts E. Vitamin D in autoimmunity:
molecular mechanisms and therapeutic potential. Front Immunol. 2016;7:697.
[189] Orbach H, Zandman-Goddard G, Amital H, et al. Novel biomarkers in autoimmune
diseases: prolactin, ferritin, vitamin D, and TPA levels in autoimmune diseases.
Ann NY Acad Sci 2007;1109:385–400.
[190] Perricone C, Agmon-Levin N, Colafrancesco S, Shoenfeld Y. Vitamins and systemic
lupus erythematosus: to D or not to D Expert Rev. Clin. Immunol 2013;9(5):397–9.
[191] Marinho A, Carvalho C, Boleixa D, Bettencourt A, Leal B, Guimaraes J, et al.
Vitamin D supplementation eﬀects on FoxP3 expression in T cells and FoxP3(+)/
IL-17A ratio and clinical course in systemic lupus erythematosus patients: a study
in a Portuguese cohort. Immunol Res 2017;65:197–206.
[192] Simpson Jr. S, der Mei IV, Taylor B. The role of vitamin D in Multiple sclerosis:
biology and biochemistry, epidemiology and potential roles in treatment. Med
Chem 2018;14:129–43.
[193] Mariani M, Vigano P, Gentilini D, Camisa B, Caporizzo E, Di Lucia P, et al. The
selective vitamin D receptor agonist, elocalcitol, reduces endometriosis development in a mouse model by inhibiting peritoneal inﬂammation. Human Reprod
2012;27:2010–9.
[194] Abbas MA, Taha MO, Disi AM, Shomaf M. Regression of endometrial implants
treated with vitamin D3 in a rat model of endometriosis. Eur J Pharmacol
2013;715:72–5.
[195] Yildirim B, Guler T, Akbulut M, Oztekin O, Sariiz G. 1-alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3 regresses endometriotic implants in rats by inhibiting neovascularization and
altering regulation of matrix metalloproteinase. Postgrad Med J 2014;126:104–10.
[196] Jurkiewicz-Przondziono J, Lemm M, Kwiatkowska-Pamula A, Ziolko E, Wojtowicz
MK. Inﬂuence of diet on the risk of developing endometriosis. Ginekol Polska
2017;88:96–102.
[197] Lee SJ, Silverman E, Bargman JM. The role of antimalarial agents in the treatment
of SLE and lupus nephritis. Nat Rev Nephrol 2011;7:718–29.
[198] Laschke M, Menger M. Anti-angiogenic treatment strategies for the therapy of
endometriosis. Hum Reprod Update 2012;18:682–702.
[199] Nirgianakis K, Bersinger NA, McKinnon B, Kostov P, Imboden S, Mueller MD.
Regression of the inﬂammatory microenvironment of the peritoneal cavity in
women with endometriosis by GnRHa treatment. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod
Biol 2013;170:550–4.
[200] Edwards RP, Huang X. Vlad AM Chronic inﬂammation in endometriosis and endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer: new roles for the “old” complement
pathway. Oncoimmunology 2015;4:e1002732.
[201] Cicardi M, Suﬀritti C, Perego F. Caccia S Novelties in the diagnosis and treatment
of angioedema. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 2016;26:212–21.
[202] Zurlo JJ, Frank MM. The long-term safety of danazol in women with hereditary
angioedema. Fertil Steril 1990;54:64–72.
[203] Perricone R, De Carolis C, Fontana L. Danazol improves ovarian condition in
hereditary angioedema. Mol Immunolo 2003;40:221–2.
[204] De Carolis C, Perricone R, Pasetto N, Dal Lago A, Fontana L. LH-RH can modulate
serum complement function in vivo in man. Complement and Inﬂamm
1991;8:139.
[205] De Carolis C, Perricone R, Miriello D, Fontana L. Long term prophylaxis of hereditary angioedema (HANE) attacks with leuprolide acetate, an LH-RH agonist.
Mol Immunol 1993;30:7.

[168] Streuli I, de Ziegler D, Santulli P, Marcellin L, Borghese B. Batteux F and Chapron
C. An update on the pharmacological management of endometriosis Expert Opin
Pharmaco J 2013;14:3.
[169] Abrão MS, Petraglia F, Falcone T, Keckstein J, Osuga Y, Chapron C. Deep endometriosis inﬁltrating the recto-sigmoid: critical factors to consider before
management. Hum Reprod Update 2015;21(3):329–39.
[170] Kettel LM, Murphy AA, Morales AJ, Ulmann A, Baulieu EE, Yen SS. Treatment of
endometriosis with the antiprogesterone mifepristone (RU486). Fertil Steril
1996;65:23–8.
[171] Kettel LM, Murphy AA, Morales AJ, Yen SS. Preliminary report on the treatment of
endometriosis with low-dose mifepristone (RU 486). Am J Obstet Gynecol
1998;178:1151–6.
[172] Yao Z, Shen X, Capodanno I, Donnelly M, Fenyk-Melody J, Hausamann J, et al.
Validation of rat endometriosis model by using raloxifene as a positive control for
the evaluation of novel SERM compounds. J Investig Surg 2005;18:177–83.
[173] Patwardhan S, Nawathe A, Yates D, Harrison G, Khan K. Systematic review of the
eﬀects of aromatase inhibitors on pain associated with endometri- osis. BJOG
2008;115:818–22.
[174] Vodolazkaia A, El-Aalamat Y, Popovic D, Mihalyi A, Bossuyt X, Kyama CM, et al.
Evaluation of a panel of 28 biomarkers for the non-invasive diagnosis of endometriosis. Human Reprod 2012;27(9):2698–3271.
[175] Parasar P, Ozcan P, Terr KL. Curr Obstet Gynecol Rep 2017;6:34.
[176] Nishida M, Watanabe K, Sato N, Ichikawa Y. Malignant transformation of ovarian
endometriosis. Gynecol Obstet Invest 2000;50(Suppl. 1):18–25.
[177] Khan KN, Kitajima M, Hiraki K, Fujishita A, Sekine I, Ishimaru T, et al. Toll-like
receptors in innate immunity: role of bacterial endotoxin and toll-like receptor 4 in
endometrium and endometriosis. Gynecol Obstet Invest 2009;68:40–52.
[178] Borrelli GM, Abrão MS, Mechsner S. Can chemokines be used as biomarkers for
endometriosis? A systematic review. Hum Reprod 2014;29:253–66.
[179] Fukui A, Funamizu A, Fuchinoue K, Kamoi M, Taima A, Fukuhara R, et al.
Functional role of uterine natural killer cells. In: Kanzaki H, editor. Uterine
Endometrial Function. 2016. p. 61–81.
[180] Itoh F, Komohara Y, Takaishi K, Honda R, Tashiro H, Kyo S, et al. Possible involvement of signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 in cell-cell interactions of peritoneal macrophages and endometrial stromal cells in human endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2013;99(6):1705–13.
[181] Barrier BF, Bates GW, Leland MM, Leach DA, Robinson RD, Propst AM. Eﬃcacy of
anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy in the treatment of spontaneous endometriosis
in baboons. Fertil Steril 2004;81(Suppl. 1):775–9.
[182] Keenan JA, Williams-Boyce PK, Massey PJ, Chen TT, Caudle MR, Bukovsky A.
Regression of endometrial explants in a rat model of endometriosis treated with
the immune modulators loxoribine and levamisole. Fertil Steril 1999;72:135–41.
[183] Xu Z, Zhao F, Lin F, Chen J, Huang Y. Lipoxin A4 inhibits the development of
endometriosis in mice: the role of anti-inﬂammation and anti-angiogenesis. Am J
Reprod Immunol 2012;67:491–7.
[184] Kumar R, Clerc AC, Gori I, Russell R, Pellegrini C, Govender L, et al. Lipoxin
prevents the progression of de novo and established endometriosis in a mouse
model by attenuating prostaglandin E2 production and estrogen signaling. PLoS
One 2014;9:e89742.
[185] Ren XU, Wang Y, Xu G, Dai L. Eﬀect of rapamycin on endometriosis in mice. Exp
Ther Med 2016;12:101–6.
[186] Vlahos NF, Gregoriou O, Deliveliotou A, Perrea D, Vlachos A, Zhao Y, et al. Eﬀect
of pentoxifylline on vascular endothelial growth factor C and ﬂk-1 expression on
endometrial implants in the rat endometriosis model. Fertil Steril

955

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

