EUROPEAN UROLOGY 67 (2015) 138–141

available at www.sciencedirect.com
journal homepage: www.europeanurology.com

Platinum Priority – Editorial and Reply from Authors
Referring to the article published on pp. 125–137 of this issue

Between a Rock and a Hard Place: The Uncertainties in Managing
Renal Stones
Thomas B.L. Lam a,b, Sam McClinton a,b,*
a

Department of Urology, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen, UK; b Academic Urology Unit, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK

The management of renal calculi has evolved over the last
few decades due to technological advances. Treatment
options include shock wave lithotripsy, percutaneous
nephrolithotomy (PCNL), or retrograde intrarenal surgery
(RIRS), with the choice of intervention guided by stone
location, size, composition, and anatomic factors [1],
along with the availability of technical expertise and
equipment. However there is considerable uncertainty
regarding how these interventions compare with each
other, a fact underlined by current clinical practice
guidelines [1]. The systematic review and meta-analysis
by De et al. [2] in this month’s issue of European Urology
represents a welcome attempt to clarify some of the
uncertainties regarding PCNL and RIRS for the treatment
of renal stones.
The review synthesised evidence based on a structured
literature assessment. Outcomes assessed included stonefree rate (SFR), need for auxiliary procedures and complication rate, and process outcomes. Meta-analysis was
planned on all outcomes irrespective of study design, and
subgroup analysis was performed on PCNL subtypes. The
review ultimately included 10 studies, 6 of which were
retrospective observational studies. In the main analysis,
the authors found PCNL had a significantly higher SFR (odds
ratio [OR]: 2.19; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.53–3.13)
and a higher complication rate (OR: 1.61; 95% CI, 1.11–2.35)
than RIRS, but no data on the need for auxiliary procedures
were presented. In the subgroup analysis, standard PCNL
had higher SFR than RIRS (OR: 4.32; 95% CI, 1.99–9.37), but
there was no difference in complication rate or the need for
auxiliary procedures. Conversely, RIRS had better SFR than
minimally invasive percutaneous procedures (OR: 1.70;

95% CI, 1.07–2.70), but there was no difference in
complication rate or the need for auxiliary procedures.
We commend the authors for attempting to address the
prevalent uncertainties regarding the management of renal
stones in a methodical and thoughtful manner. Reviews
regarding surgical practice are rarely undertaken systematically [3], and high-quality systematic reviews concerning
kidney diseases are lacking [4]. The merits of a high-quality
systematic review, supplemented by a robustly undertaken
meta-analysis, are undeniable [5]. The observed greater
complication rate associated with PCNL compared with
RIRS on meta-analysis is particularly striking, considering
the consistency of magnitude and direction of effects across
studies and lack of statistical heterogeneity, in spite of the
inherent clinical and methodological heterogeneity that
must surely be present due to the diverse types of included
studies. This finding supports efforts to refine and innovate
PCNL to minimise morbidity while maintaining its stoneclearing efficacy.
However, to interpret the findings of any evidence
synthesis, especially in terms of its potential impact on
clinical practice and clinical practice guidelines, a close
scrutiny of its conduct and processes is mandatory. In this
context, the work suffers from significant methodological
limitations. The greatest concern relates to the authors’
decision to combine unadjusted data from retrospective
observational studies and randomised trials in performing
their meta-analysis. This strategy is usually discouraged
because it is difficult to control and account for biases,
heterogeneity, and confounding, hence risking misleading
or spurious findings [6]. The sum of multiple biases and
uncertain estimates of individual studies are magnified

DOI of original article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2014.07.003.
* Corresponding author. Department of Urology, Aberdeen Royal Inﬁrmary, Aberdeen AB25 2ZN, UK. Tel. +44 1224 550517; Fax: +44 1224 1224 550726.
E-mail address: smcclinton@nhs.net (S. McClinton).
0302-2838/# 2014 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

EUROPEAN UROLOGY 67 (2015) 138–141

when such data are combined while introducing new biases
and errors in the analysis.
Second, the conduct of the review is generally poorly
described. In particular, the patient or problem, intervention of interest, comparison, and outcome (PICO) elements
are not clearly or adequately specified. Did the review
include patients with all stone sizes and all stone locations?
Did it matter if patients were first-time or recurrent stone
formers? What about the composition of stones? Which
group was considered the experimental intervention, and
which was the control? What were the prespecified
comparisons? The outcomes were also poorly specified in
terms of the primary outcome, how it was defined (eg, were
residual fragments allowed in the definition of stone-free
clearance), and when it was measured. The risk of bias (RoB)
assessment results were merely summarised; no detailed
description was provided, and it was unclear which
confounding variables were considered in the RoB assessment for observational studies.
All things considered, there was little evidence that the
review adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis framework [7].
The observation that only 16 articles of 30 000 abstracts
were eligible for full-text screening is highly unusual,
especially considering that nonrandomised and observational study designs were included. There was a clear
imbalance in the number of participants between the two
groups, with almost twice as many patients who had PCNL
(n = 727) compared with RIRS (n = 454), which is typical of
any synthesis involving retrospective observational studies.
There was moderate to high statistical heterogeneity for
virtually all outcomes except for complication rate, which
seriously limits the reliability of most of the review findings.
Why was subgroup or sensitivity analysis not planned on
important confounders such as stone size and location,
patient age, and gender to explore and account for such
heterogeneity that must surely have been anticipated?
The authors used RoB assessment as a surrogate for
quality of evidence. The quality of evidence for any research
question is influenced by the interplay of many elements
that extend far beyond the risk of bias of individual studies
alone; these include inconsistency, imprecision and indirectness of effects, magnitude of effect, and the impact of
opposing biases and confounders [8]. Consequently, the
reported quality assessment is incomplete, which hinders
any meaningful interpretation of the review findings.
Lastly, the authors conclude that RIRS should be
recommended as standard therapy for stones <2 cm. Given

139

the considerable limitations of the review conduct and the
uncertainties associated with its findings, this recommendation is at best misleading, and it is out of sync with
present clinical practice guidelines [1].
In conclusion, although the review by De et al. [2] raises
interesting points, the fundamental question of how PCNL
truly compares with RIRS for the management of renal
stones remains essentially unanswered. Ultimately, the
paper does highlight the relative lack of reliable and good
quality data in the evidence base concerning this clinically
and economically important question. This emphasises the
need for high-quality, robust, and well-designed prospective RCTs incorporating clinically meaningful outcomes
that are important to patients, based on standardised
definitions and measured using standardised outcome
measures [9].
Conﬂicts of interest: The authors have nothing to disclose.

References
[1] Türk C, Knoll T, Petrik A, et al. Guidelines on urolithiasis 2014.
European Association of Urology Web site. http://www.uroweb.org/
gls/pdf/22%20Urolithiasis_LR.pdf. Updated 2014.
[2] De S, Autorino R, Kim FJ, et al. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy versus
retrograde intrarenal surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Eur Urol 2015;67:125–37.
[3] Panesar SS, Thakrar R, Athanasiou T, Sheikh A. Comparison of reports
of randomized controlled trials and systematic reviews in surgical
journals: literature review. J R Soc Med 2006;99:470–4722.
[4] Mrkobrada M, Thiessen-Philbrook H, Haynes RB, Iansavichus AV,
Rehman F, Garg AX. Need for quality improvement in renal systematic reviews. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008;3:1102–111414.
[5] Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine 2011 levels of evidence.
Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine Web site. http://
www.cebm.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/CEBM-Levels-of-Evidence-2.1.pdf.
[6] Egger M, Schneider M, Davey Smith G. Spurious precision? Metaanalysis of observational studies. BMJ 1998;316:140–1444.
[7] Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG. PRISMA Group. Preferred
reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the
PRISMA statement. J Clin Epidemiol 2009;62:1006–101212.
[8] Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Vist GE, Falck-Ytter Y, Schünemann
HJ. GRADE Working Group. What is ‘‘quality of evidence’’ and why is
it important to clinicians? BMJ 2008;336:995–9988.
[9] Core Outcome Measures in Effectiveness Trials (COMET) initiative.
COMET Initiative Web site. http://www.comet-initiative.org/.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2014.07.016

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

