Feature Review

Glucocorticoids and
Reproduction: Trafﬁc Control
on the Road to Reproduction
Shannon Whirledge1,* and John A. Cidlowski2,*
Glucocorticoids are steroid hormones that regulate diverse cellular functions
and are essential to facilitate normal physiology. However, stress-induced
levels of glucocorticoids result in several pathologies including profound reproductive dysfunction. Compelling new evidence indicates that glucocorticoids
are crucial to the establishment and maintenance of reproductive function. The
fertility-promoting or -inhibiting activity of glucocorticoids depends on timing,
dose, and glucocorticoid responsiveness within a given tissue, which is mediated by the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). The GR gene and protein are subject
to cellular processing, contributing to signaling diversity and providing a mechanism by which both physiological and stress-induced levels of glucocorticoids
function in a cell-speciﬁc manner. Understanding how glucocorticoids regulate
fertility and infertility may lead to novel approaches to the regulation of reproductive function.
Introduction
Glucocorticoids are essential for stress adaptation through the regulation of metabolic activity,
behavior, and reproduction, in which trade-offs are made between immediate survival and
future offspring. Stress-induced levels of glucocorticoids mediate this process through direct
and indirect actions on the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal (HPG) axis. Interestingly, the
presenting complaint of the ﬁrst Cushing’s syndrome (see Glossary) patient in 1912 was
secondary amenorrhea. However, the molecular mechanisms by which high levels of glucocorticoids suppress fertility are complex and remain to be fully discovered. Moreover, basal
glucocorticoid levels are critically important for the establishment and maintenance of fertility,
as evidenced in patients with Addison’s disease who present with premature ovarian failure
and oligospermia [1,2]. Our current understanding of glucocorticoid signaling in the context of
reproductive physiology is limited. Notably, a balance between low and high levels of glucocorticoids differentiates between fertility and infertility and elucidating the molecular mechanisms governing this shift is a potential new direction for future research.
Circulating levels of glucocorticoids are a function of the activation status of the HPA axis (Box
1). The biological effects of glucocorticoids are determined by serum concentrations in concert
with relative expression of the 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11b-HSD) isoenzymes and the GR (gene: NR3C1), a ligand-dependent transcription factor (Box 2). The
transcriptional activity of the GR demonstrates profound diversity, stimulating or suppressing
the expression of 10–20% of all genes in the human genome (Box 3) [3]. Identifying which genes
are targets of GR regulation in reproductive tissues will provide a basis for understanding the
mechanisms by which glucocorticoids regulate reproduction and a framework for the complex
regulatory networks. Establishing which signaling networks are associated with stress-induced

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

Trends
Glucocorticoids exhibit both central
and peripheral regulation of the reproductive axis.
Within the reproductive organs, basal
glucocorticoids contribute to reproductive function while stress-induced
levels induce suppression of reproductive function.
Transgenic animal models have aided
in the discovery of the tissue-speciﬁc
functions of glucocorticoids. However,
studies in reproductive tissues are
needed.
Immune cells play an active role in male
and female fertility, and administration
of glucocorticoids or stress may disrupt the immune system resulting in
reproductive dysfunction.

1
Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology, and Reproductive
Sciences, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA
2
Laboratory of Signal Transduction,
National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Department of Health and
Human Services, 111 TW Alexander
Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC
27709, USA

*Correspondence:
shannon.whirledge@yale.edu (S.
Whirledge) and
cidlows1@niehs.nih.gov (J.A.
Cidlowski).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2017.02.005
Published by Elsevier Ltd.

399

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Box 1. Glucocorticoid Production and Bioavailability
Glucocorticoids are steroid hormones synthesized and released by the adrenal cortex under the regulation of the HPA
axis. The production of glucocorticoids by the HPA axis is pulsatile, displaying both circadian and ultradian rhythms.
Corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) and arginine vasopressin are secreted from the parvicellular neurons of the
hypothalamus into the pituitary portal circulation, which stimulates adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) release from
the anterior pituitary gland. ACTH acts on the adrenal gland to induce steroidogenesis and the production of
glucocorticoids. Endocrine feedback loops exist where glucocorticoids inhibit CRH expression and secretion and
ACTH output [119–121]. The rhythmic secretion of glucocorticoids is critical to the maintenance of physiological
homeostasis, but acute exposures to stress transiently induce HPA activity and glucocorticoid release.
Approximately 95% of secreted glucocorticoids circulate bound to cortisol-binding globulin (CBG) or albumin and,
therefore, expression of these binding proteins determines the level of biologically free glucocorticoids [122,123]. The
circulating half-life of glucocorticoids is variable (66–120 min) but glucocorticoids bound to CBG have a longer half-life
than unbound glucocorticoids [124,125]. Unbound glucocorticoids are highly lipophilic and able to cross the plasma
membrane through simple diffusion. In cells that express the multidrug-resistance p-glycoprotein, entry of glucocorticoids into the intracellular compartment can be restricted by active transport out of the cell [126]. Within the cell
interconversion of glucocorticoids to the active (cortisol and corticosterone) or inactive (cortisone and 11-dehydrocorticosterone) forms by 11b-HSD I and II controls ligand availability to the GR [127]. Collectively, the biological activity
of glucocorticoids is a balance between synthesis and secretion, diffusion and transport, and metabolism and
clearance.

infertility will ultimately provide new avenues for therapy. Here we review recent ﬁndings on
glucocorticoid action in the reproductive system, summarizing historical data and highlighting
new insights where research is ongoing.

Glucocorticoid Actions in the Hypothalamus and Pituitary: Recent
Developments
The hypothalamus and pituitary preside over reproductive physiology by acting as a central
terminal for the input and output of endocrine signals [4]. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) is synthesized and secreted by the hypothalamus and then crosses through the
hypophyseal portal system into the anterior pituitary. In the pituitary GnRH induces the
synthesis and release of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) from
the gonadotropes, which trigger testosterone release from the testis and estradiol and progesterone release from the ovaries. A feedback loop exists by which testosterone inhibits the
secretion of GnRH and therefore FSH and LH production. In females, ovarian estradiol also
exerts negative feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary. However, during the late follicular
phase of the menstrual cycle rising levels of estradiol from the follicle trigger a switch from
negative to positive feedback on the hypothalamus resulting in increased GnRH secretion.
During the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, rising levels of progesterone negatively feed
back to suppress activity in the hypothalamus and pituitary. At the late luteal phase, the levels of
estradiol and progesterone decline, allowing gonadotrophins to again rise and triggering the
beginning of a new cycle.
Increased glucocorticoid exposure, either by stress or by exogenous treatment, leads to
profound reproductive dysfunction through well-described effects in the hypothalamus and
pituitary [5–7]. Glucocorticoids modulate the HPG axis by directly inhibiting the release of GnRH
from the hypothalamus and the synthesis and release of gonadotropins from the pituitary.
However, the signaling pathways by which this occurs remain under investigation and are
further complicated by the recent discovery of new neuropeptides such as kisspeptin (KISS1)
and gonadotropin-inhibitory hormone (GnIH). These neuropeptides have opposing effects on
GnRH release from the hypothalamus and are responsive to high levels of glucocorticoids.
KISS1 exerts stimulatory effects on GnRH secretion through its cognate receptor KISS-1R [also
known as G protein-coupled receptor 54 (GPR54)], which is coexpressed in GnRH neurons.
KISS1 neurons in the anteroventral periventricular nucleus and periventricular nucleus continuum of the preoptic area of the hypothalamus express GR, suggesting that glucocorticoids can

400

Glossary
11b-Hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase (11b-HSD)
isoenzymes: enzymes that catalyze
the interconversion of active
glucocorticoids (11-oxoreductase
activity) and their inactive metabolites
(11b-dehydrogenase activity). The
type I isoenzyme demonstrates both
11b-dehydrogenase and 11oxoreductase activities while the type
II isoenzyme has only 11bdehydrogenase activity.
Addison’s disease: severe or total
deﬁciency of the hormones made in
the adrenal cortex; also known as
primary adrenal insufﬁciency or
hypocortisolism.
Adrenalectomy: surgical removal of
the adrenal glands (bi- or unilateral).
Bishop score: a prelabor cervix
score used to predict the response
to labor induction or chance of
spontaneous labor. A low Bishop
score is associated with a greater
probability that induction of labor will
fail.
Blood–testis barrier (BTB): a
physical barrier within the
seminiferous tubules formed by tight
junctions, adherens junctions, and
desmosome junctions between
adjacent Sertoli cells; forms an
immunological barrier that
segregates the basal and adluminal
compartments.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing (ChIP-seq): a method
to identify genome-wide DNA-binding
sites for proteins. Proteins
crosslinked to chromatin are isolated
by antibody immunoprecipitation.
Enriched DNA-binding sites are
sequenced and mapped to a
reference genome. Sequencing
identiﬁes the location and quantity of
sites bound by a protein.
Cre–lox technology: system for the
creation of tissue-speciﬁc or
inducible knockout mouse models by
catalyzing the recombination of two
loxP recognition (ﬂoxed) sites
introduced into the gene of interest
with tissue-speciﬁc/inducible
expression of the Cre enzyme.
Cushing’s syndrome: a disorder
resulting from prolonged exposure to
elevated levels of the endogenous
glucocorticoid cortisol; often results
from exogenous glucocorticoid use,
but can also be caused by pituitary
adenomas and adrenal tumors.
Developmental origins of health
and disease (DOHaD) hypothesis:

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Box 2. The GR: Structure and Regulation
The molecular response to glucocorticoids is mediated by intracellular GR. The GR is a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily of ligand-dependent transcription factors [128]. All members of this superfamily share a similar domain
structure: an N-terminal transactivation (AF1) domain, a central DNA-binding domain (DBD), and a C-terminal ligandbinding domain (LBD). In addition to comprising the ligand-binding pocket, the LBD also contains sequences important
for receptor dimerization and nuclear localization and a second transactivation domain (AF2) that mediates liganddependent interactions with coregulators. The DBD and the LBD are separated by a small, ﬂexible hinge region, which
plays a role in ligand binding-mediated conformational changes.
The human GR is the product of one gene (NR3C1) comprising nine exons. Exon 1 forms the 50 untranslated region of
the human GR and exon 2 encodes the NTD, which is poorly conserved and therefore the most variable domain among
nuclear receptors. The DBD, the most conserved region in the nuclear receptor family, comprises exons 3 and 4 and
exons 5–9 encode the hinge region and LBD. Alternative splicing of the NR3C1 gene primarily from the C-terminal end
produces the human GRa, GRb, GRg, GR-A, and GR-P transcriptional isoforms [129–132]. Research has mainly
focused on glucocorticoid signaling through GRa and GRb, which are identical proteins through amino acid 727 that
diverge in C-terminal exon 9. GRb lacks sequences that encode helices 11 and 12 of the LBD and is therefore unable to
bind glucocorticoids [133]. GRb was thought to function primarily as a dominant-negative regulator of GRa, but
genome-wide transcriptional analysis of overexpressed human GRb indicates that it maintains inherent transcriptional
activity [130,134,135]. The sequence of GRg differs from that of GRa by the inclusion of an arginine residue between
exons 3 and 4 of the DBD from the use of an alternative intronic splice donor site [132]. This single amino acid insertion
demonstrates the functional importance of this region, as the transcriptional activity of GRg is signiﬁcantly reduced
[136,137]. Interestingly, differences in the DBD of GRg alter the DNA-binding sequence speciﬁcity and result in a unique
transcriptome [138,139]. The GR-A and GR-P isoforms contain incomplete LBDs and relatively little is known about their
functions in vivo [131,140]. Each GR transcriptional splice variant is capable of generating additional isoforms through
alternative translation initiation mechanisms [141]. In exon 2 eight highly conserved AUG start codons generate the GRA, -B, -C1, -C2, -C3, -D1, -D2, and -D3 isoforms. These translational isoforms have distinct tissue distribution and
subcellular localization, regulate unique genes, and differentially regulate the cellular response to glucocorticoids [142–
144].

act directly on these neurons [8]. In mice corticosterone treatment diminished hypothalamic
expression of KISS1 during the estradiol-induced LH surge and decreased the activation of
KISS1 neurons [9]. Impairment of KISS1 neurons represents a newly discovered mechanism by
which glucocorticoids are able to suppress the HPG axis. GnIH [mammalian ortholog: RFamide-related peptide-3 (RFRP3)] neurons inhibit the activity of GnRH neurons and KISS1
neurons [10]. Acute (audiovisual imposition of a predator, hypoglycemia, or lipopolysaccharide
challenge) and chronic (synthetically induced plasma cortisol levels) stress in sheep increase
the function of GnIH neurons and increased contacts with GnRH neurons [11]. Immobilization
stress-induced upregulation of GnIH led to inhibition of LH release from the pituitary [12].
Adrenalectomy blocked the induction of GnIH, suggesting that glucocorticoids released in
response to stress mediated this effect. NR3C1 is coexpressed in GnIH neurons and corticosterone treatment in quail and a rat hypothalamic neuronal cell line increased GnIH expression
through glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) in the GnIH promoter [13]. Regulation of
GnRH expression and release by KISS1 and GnIH represents two novel mechanisms by which
glucocorticoids indirectly modulate the reproductive functions of the hypothalamus and
pituitary.

Glucocorticoids Regulate the Function of Organs in the Reproductive Tract
Ovary
In addition to the effects on ovarian cyclicity mediated through the hypothalamus and pituitary,
glucocorticoids impact ovarian physiology through regulating the functions of granulosa cells,
oocytes, cumulus cells, and luteal cells [9]. Glucocorticoids differentially induce and repress
steroidogenesis in the ovary. In rat preovulatory granulosa cells, dexamethasone increased
production of progesterone by increasing the expression of caspase-3 and the steroidogenic
proteins steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) and cytochrome P450 cholesterol side
chain-cleavage enzyme [14]. Glucocorticoids (cortisol and dexamethasone) have also been
shown to decrease LH-induced StAR protein levels and progesterone production in rat and

a theory, previously known as the
fetal origins hypothesis, based on
David Barker’s analysis of
epidemiological studies in the early
1900s that states that environmental
factors encountered by a
developmentally plastic organism
early in life inﬂuence health and
disease outcomes throughout
adulthood.
Glucocorticoid response element
(GRE): a short palindromic sequence
of DNA comprising two 6-bp
sequences separated by a threenucleotide spacer that the GR
recognizes and binds to directly
regulate transcription [50
RGRACAnnnTGTYCY30 ; R = purine
(A or G), Y = pyrimidine (C or T),
n = any nucleotide].
Inﬂammasome: a multiprotein
intracellular complex that activates
caspase enzymes leading to the
processing and secretion of
proinﬂammatory cytokines in
response to pathogenic
microorganisms and sterile stressors.
Negative glucocorticoid response
element (nGRE): related DNA
sequences bound by the GR distinct
from the transrepression activities of
glucocorticoids. The nGRE motif
tolerates single-base-pair mutations
and contains a 0–2-bp spacer
between inverted repeated motifs.
Post-translational modiﬁcation:
chemical modiﬁcations to a protein,
including phosphorylation,
glycosylation, ubiquitination,
nitrosylation, methylation, acetylation,
lipidation, and proteolysis, that
increase the functional diversity of
the proteome. Post-translational
modiﬁcations can occur at many
stages in the life of a protein and can
also be reversible.
Single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP): a DNA sequence variation at
a single nucleotide that is
appreciable within a population. The
variation may be a substitution,
deletion, or insertion. SNPs are
found within genes, in noncoding
regions of DNA, and in intergenic
regions. When occurring within a
gene, the SNP may lead to an amino
acid substitution. SNPs can be
associated with traits or diseases or
have no known function.

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

401

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Box 3. GR Signaling
Once in the cytoplasm, glucocorticoids bind the GR resulting in a conformational change, unmasking of nuclear
localization signals, and subsequent nuclear translocation of the glucocorticoid–GR complex. Classically, glucocorticoids were thought to act exclusively through the genomic actions of the activated GR. Recent evidence indicates that
glucocorticoids can also act through signaling cascades secondary to the conformational change of the glucocorticoid–
GR complex or through extranuclear GRs, although the identity of the membrane-associated GR remains unknown
[145–147]. In the nucleus the ligand-bound GR mediates the genomic actions of the GR by regulating gene transcription
in direct and indirect mechanisms. Direct transcriptional regulation requires binding of GR homodimer complexes to
well-deﬁned GREs. However, motif analysis of GR ChIP-seq data sets evaluating GR-bound regions indicates that
<42% of binding peaks contain a high-stringency motif match [148]. This suggests that GRE binding is not a
requirement for DNA association. Alternatively, the glucocorticoid–GR complex can directly bind distinct negative
GREs (nGREs) to inhibit gene transcription [149]. GR association with DNA can also occur through mechanisms of
indirect gene regulation by the GR that involve interactions with other DNA-bound transcription factors (protein–protein
tethering) or through cooperative binding with other transcription factors at neighboring sites (composite regulation).
The DNA- or complex-bound GR recruits cofactors that facilitate conversion of the signal into transcriptional activity via
RNA polymerases or by regulating paused elongation complexes [150].
The GR is constitutively expressed in almost all cells, but the actions of glucocorticoids demonstrate tissue- and cell
type-speciﬁc diversity. The glucocorticoid response is determined by many factors including the availability of glucocorticoids and the sensitivity to glucocorticoids in a target tissue. The relative level of the GR and the relative expression
of the isoforms can determine the response to glucocorticoids in a given tissue or cell [151]. The GR is subject to various
post-translational modiﬁcations, which can mediate subcellular trafﬁcking, promoter speciﬁcity, cofactor interaction,
receptor stability, and turnover [152]. At speciﬁc gene loci, the response to glucocorticoids is regulated by the
recruitment of cofactors, which can act in various mechanisms including remodeling of chromatin, facilitating the
assembly of transcriptional machinery, or modifying histones or other components of the transcription factor complex
[153–156]. These coregulators of GR function maintain tissue-speciﬁc expression [157,158]. The unique transcriptional
proﬁles of the GR also rely on distal enhancers that loop to the promoter of target genes and open regions of chromatin
that are highly cell-type speciﬁc [159,160]. Individual glucocorticoid sensitivity has been associated with SNPs in NR3C1
that alter protein stability, ligand binding afﬁnity, transactivating capacity, and interactions with coactivators or
corepressors [161]. Polymorphisms in the genes that encode the 11b-HSD isoenzymes have been identiﬁed and
may also contribute to glucocorticoid sensitivity [162–164].

human granulosa cells [15,16]. These differences may reﬂect differences in dose or stage of
follicular development. Cortisol treatment or elevated glucocorticoid levels due to restraint
stress in mice impairs oocyte development potential when evaluated ex vivo [17]. Isolated mural
granulosa cells displayed increased apoptosis in response to elevated cortisol, which was
associated with higher levels of Fas ligand, and cumulus cells were sensitized to undergo
apoptosis following serum-starved culture conditions. Glucocorticoid exposure is also associated with decreased mRNA expression of NR3C1 and the ovarian growth factors insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in mural granulosa cells.
Interestingly, culture of in vitro-fertilized bovine oocytes increased blastocyst development
rates, indicating that the response of oocytes to glucocorticoids may be context dependent
[18]. Moreover, what is known regarding the function of endogenous glucocorticoids in ovarian
physiology stems largely from exposure studies and may not represent direct functions that
occur at physiological levels in the ovary.
Uterus, Placenta, and Labor
Glucocorticoid regulation of uterine biology has historically been described in terms of the
antagonistic effects of glucocorticoids on estrogen action and has only recently been explored
as an independent regulator of uterine function. Dexamethasone blocks estrogen-induced
uterine growth and proliferation in mice, reducing the number of implantation sites when
administered before estradiol-induced implantation [19,20]. Gene ontology analysis of dexamethasone- and estradiol-regulated genes in the mouse uterus indicates that the cell cycle and
embryonic development are among the top regulated networks [21]. Dexamethasone administration in mice also uniquely regulates the expression of genes whose functions are related to
cellular development, growth and proliferation, and signaling. In the neonatal mouse uterus,
dexamethasone inhibits epithelial cell proliferation through both GR-dependent and

402

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

-independent mechanisms [22]. Decidualized human endometrial cells also display a unique
GR-dependent transcriptome enriched for Krüppel-associated box domain-containing zincﬁnger proteins, a family of transcriptional repressors [23]. Interestingly, GR signaling is responsible for repressing global expression of trimethylated H3K9 levels during stromal cell differentiation, suggesting that the GR can both directly regulate gene expression and globally alter
transcription through regulation of histone modiﬁcations in human uterine cells.
The placenta is developmentally plastic and therefore responsive to multiple stimuli including
altered glucocorticoid levels. Dexamethasone administered during early placentation inhibits
the proliferation, migration, and invasion of trophoblasts, induces placental oxidative damage,
and manifests as reduced placental and fetal size [24]. Maternal administration of glucocorticoids reduces placental weight and is associated with reduced expression of proliferative
markers and increased expression of apoptotic factors [25,26]. In animal models of maternal
prenatal stress, increased glucocorticoid levels are correlated with intrauterine growth restriction. Fetal growth restriction mediated through excess endogenous corticosterone or synthetic
dexamethasone exposure results in altered placental transporter function and glucose transport and reduced expression of proangiogenic factors [27,28]. Glucocorticoid exposure at the
maternal–fetal interface is in part regulated through expression of the 11b-HSD isoenzymes in
discrete maternal and fetal compartments [29]. Dysregulated expression of the 11b-HSD
isoenzymes by glucocorticoid excess further potentiates the adverse effects of high levels
of glucocorticoid on placental function. Interestingly, expression of the NR3C1 translational
isoforms varies between term and preterm human placenta and with prenatal glucocorticoid
exposure, suggesting a mechanism by which changes to the GR protein proﬁle may also
mediate the response to increased glucocorticoids [30].
Studies conducted on animals and pregnant woman have indicated the importance of glucocorticoid signaling for the initiation of labor [31,32]. In sheep glucocorticoids drive the shift to an
estrogen-primed contractile myometrium through induction of the placental enzyme cytochrome P450 17a-hydoxylase (P450c17) [adrenal dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) in
humans] [31]. Once the myometrium has achieved an estrogen-primed state, prostaglandins
critically stimulate myometrial contractions, induce cervical ripening, and trigger fetal membrane rupture. Glucocorticoids contribute to the synthesis of prostaglandins by stimulating the
production of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in human amnion cells and ovine placental trophoblast cells [33,34]. During parturition cortisol also contributes to the rupture of fetal membranes
by inducing prostaglandins and inducing apoptosis in the amnion epithelial cells [35]. Intravenous dexamethasone improved the Bishop score of the cervix and reduced the time between
labor induction and active labor in women. However, synthetic glucocorticoids administered
preterm for fetal lung maturation do not induce labor, which may denote differential responses
dependent on the extent of myometrial priming.
Fetal Development in Utero
It is well appreciated that the in utero environment directly contributes to physiological disorders
that manifest postpartum [the developmental origins of health and disease (DOHaD)
hypothesis]. Fetal exposure to high levels of glucocorticoids is believed to be a major
contributor to early-life programming of adult-onset disease. Data supporting the role of stress
and elevated glucocorticoids in fetal programming have been documented in many species
and thoroughly reviewed [36–41]. Interestingly, programming of the HPA axis in response to
prenatal stressors demonstrates sex-speciﬁc differences [42]. A systematic review of human
studies concluded that the placenta of female offspring altered permeability to maternal
glucocorticoids through regulation of the 11b-HSD enzymes in response to maternal stress
[42]. Maternal exposure to dexamethasone in rats results in sexually dimorphic behavior in
offspring associated with structural changes to neuronal populations [43,44]. In mice the

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

403

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

cardiovascular and renal renin–angiotensin–aldosterone systems also respond to elevated
prenatal corticosterone in a sexually dimorphic manner, potentially through alteration of adrenal
function [45–47]. Epigenetic factors may also play a key role in the glucocorticoid-driven effects
of fetal programming, including altered methylation status of the GR following neonatal
dexamethasone exposure [48]. It is important to recognize the timing of exposure when
considering the correlation between animal models and human fetuses. Development in
the prenatal and early postnatal rodent is more similar to the ﬁrst two trimesters of human
pregnancy and therefore may not accurately model the response in humans during the third
trimester. Synthetic analogs of glucocorticoids are routinely administered during the third
trimester to women at risk of early- or late-preterm delivery; therefore, elucidating the longterm effects of late-term glucocorticoid exposure is more accurately evaluated in a human
population than a rodent model.
Testis
Both physiological and stress-induced levels of glucocorticoids also mediate testicular function. Adrenalectomy in male rats demonstrated that homeostatic levels of adrenal hormones,
including glucocorticoids, are required to maintain steroidogenesis, spermatogenesis, and
sperm maturation [49]. Testosterone production increased following adrenalectomy in rats and
this was prevented by glucocorticoid replacement [50]. Decreased spermatid number following
adrenalectomy was rescued by concurrent dexamethasone treatment, indicating that adrenally
produced hormones are responsible for maintaining sperm production. Interestingly, glucocorticoid replacement exacerbated the morphological defects evident in the seminiferous
tubules of adrenalectomized males, which may reﬂect differences between the endogenous
and synthetic hormones. Alternatively, other endocrine hormones produced by the adrenal
gland, such as mineralocorticoids and epinephrine, could be responsible for the maintenance
of testicular morphology, or morphology within the seminiferous epithelium could be sensitive
to glucocorticoid dose. High levels of circulating glucocorticoids related to stress, Cushing’s
disease, or exogenous hormone treatment suppress male fertility through repressing the
expression of steroidogenic enzymes, inducing testicular oxidative stress, reducing the testicular response to gonadotropins, and prompting apoptosis of Leydig and germ cells [5].
Elevated glucocorticoids may also control Leydig cell number through the induction of cell
cycle arrest, as was demonstrated following dexamethasone treatment in R2C rat Leydig tumor
cells in vitro [51]. Understanding the physiological range of adrenal steroids that supports male
fertility is critical in patients who undergo adrenalectomy or have Addison’s disease or Cushing’s syndrome.

Mouse Models to Uncover GR Actions
Whole-body GR-null mice exhibit perinatal lethality due to defects in lung maturation and
subsequent respiratory failure, which precludes the study of reproductive function in these mice
[52]. Investigators have made use of tissue transplants from embryonic GR-null mice into
syngeneic hosts, but this method is limited by the types of tissues that can be transplanted and
the end points that can be measured. The advent of Cre–lox technology allowed researchers
to investigate the cell-autonomous versus indirect effects of GR in tissues that critically support
reproductive function. However, models to investigate the direct actions of glucocorticoids are
limited. Currently in the reproductive system, the tissue- or cell type-speciﬁc functions of the GR
have been evaluated in the uterus, Sertoli cells, mammary epithelial cells, and prostate epithelial
cells [53–56].
Conditional ablation of uterine NR3C1 demonstrated the direct actions of glucocorticoids in
early pregnancy, indicating that glucocorticoid signaling is critical for the establishment of
uterine receptivity and the subsequent endometrial remodeling that occurs during decidualization. [53]. The immune response is likely to play a key role in establishing endometrial

404

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

receptivity [57] and genes related to the inﬂammatory response and immune cell trafﬁcking
were substantially dysregulated in the absence of uterine GR [53]. Thus, the GR can locally
coordinate the immune response in early pregnancy, thereby contributing to endometrial
receptivity. Moreover, the expression of genes known to contribute to proper implantation
was altered when NR3C1 was conditionally ablated from the uterus, suggesting that uterine
glucocorticoid signaling may be necessary for the molecular framework that decides uterine
receptivity. Glucocorticoid signaling in the uterus may also be required for the cell-fate decision
of stromal cells during decidualization, although the direct gene targets of the GR that regulate
cell proliferation or apoptosis in the uterus remain to be determined. Deletion of NR3C1 in
Sertoli cells through the use of anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) Cre produced a profound
phenotype where the GR was determined to be required for Sertoli cell maintenance [54].
Although male Sertoli cell-speciﬁc NR3C1-knockout mice are fertile, numbers of Sertoli cells
and stage-speciﬁc spermatocytes/spermatids were signiﬁcantly reduced. The Sertoli cell
NR3C1-knockout model also revealed that glucocorticoid signaling in Sertoli cells mediates
testicular steroidogenesis and critically maintains endocrine feedback pathways. The uterine
and Sertoli cell transgenic mouse models have proved that glucocorticoids play a homeostatic
role in the regulation of fertility and also provide a direct link between the stress response and
fertility.
Before the creation of a tissue-speciﬁc model of glucocorticoid action in mammary epithelial
cells, researchers utilized mice harboring a deletion in the NR3C1 gene (GRdim), which was
reported to prevent GR transcriptional regulation through direct DNA binding, and tissuetransplantation techniques from GR-deﬁcient mice [58,59]. In the viable GRdim mice, mammary
gland development was impaired due to reduced ductal epithelial cell proliferation in virgin
mice, although mammary gland differentiation and milk production during pregnancy were
normal [59]. The GRdim mutant maintains transcriptional regulation through protein–protein
interactions and direct transactivation by the GRdim mutant has been described for some
genes, indicating that the mechanisms of GR action in the mammary gland remain poorly
understood in this model [60]. Embryonic mammary buds from mice with a disrupted second
exon of NR3C1 were transplanted into the cleared mammary fat pad of 3-week-old recipient
mice to circumvent perinatal lethality and study the role of the GR in mammary gland
development [52,58]. These transplants displayed abnormal ductal morphogenesis in virgin
mice but no defects in development during pregnancy, lactation, or involution. However, the
exon 2 hypomorph yields a ligand-responsive truncated GR fragment, which suggests that
studies with this model were unable to fully appreciate the functions of the GR [61]. Transgenic
mice with mammary epithelial cell-speciﬁc deletion of NR3C1 late in pregnancy exhibited
defects in lobuloalveolar development due to reduced cell proliferation, although expression of
milk proteins and milk secretion were not affected [55]. Interestingly, none of the in vivo models
of disrupted glucocorticoid signaling in the mammary gland demonstrated defects in milk
protein production compared with previous experiments that determined that glucocorticoids
are essential for the transcription of milk protein genes and support milk secretion [62]. The
differences in the observed phenotypes may reﬂect the limits of current transgenic models and
may be resolved with targeted deletion of NR3C1 in other mammary cell types.
The prostate expresses the GR and the direct actions of glucocorticoid signaling in prostate
physiology are not well understood. A prostate epithelial cell-speciﬁc NR3C1 knockout was
created using Probasin Cre to determine the cell-speciﬁc role of glucocorticoids in the prostate
[56]. Deletion of prostate epithelial cell NR3C1 demonstrated that glucocorticoid signaling in
epithelial cells is not required for prostate development or for the prostate’s morphological
response to the presence or absence of androgens. This model showed that glucocorticoidmediated prostate epithelial cell hyperplasia results from paracrine actions of the GR originating
in the stroma and not direct signaling within the epithelial cells. These studies suggest that the

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

405

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

actions of glucocorticoids vary by prostate cell type, which is likely to be important in
interpreting results from human prostate cell lines in vitro and understanding the role of the
GR in prostate cancer.
Changes in the bioavailability of glucocorticoids have been modeled through the creation of
whole-body and tissue-speciﬁc 11b-HSD I- and II-knockout mice and rats [63–67]. These
models have provided insights into the consequences of intrauterine glucocorticoid excess
during pregnancy. In the mouse 11b-HSD II is expressed in the stromal cells of the endometrium and the labyrinthine zone of the placenta, the primary site of maternal–fetal exchange
where maternal blood ﬂows over embryo-derived trophoblasts [68]. Therefore, impaired
expression of 11b-HSD II exposes both the placenta and the fetus to locally high levels of
glucocorticoids. 11b-HSD II-null mice weigh less at birth, which was correlated with reduced
fetal capillary development accompanied by lower placental expression of the angiogenic
factors vascular endothelial growth factor A (Vegfa) and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (Pparg), decreased expression of glucose transporter 3 (Slc2a3; GLUT3),
reduced placental transport of glucose to the offspring, and a smaller placenta [69]. The free
transfer of maternal glucocorticoids through the placenta in the absence of 11b-HSD II
indicates that glucocorticoid overexposure is detrimental to placentation and placental function. The role of physiological levels of cortisol has not been determined.
It is important to note that tissue-speciﬁc deletion of NR3C1 has been accomplished through
the use of several unique ﬂoxed constructs that excise different exons of NR3C1. For instance,
exon 3-ﬂoxed mice were used to create the Sertoli cell, mammary epithelial cell, and prostate
epithelial cell knockout mice, and the uterine knockout model utilized mice ﬂoxed for exon 3 and
4 [70,71]. Exon 2-ﬂoxed mice have been generated by two groups, although this model has not
been utilized to develop tissue-speciﬁc knockouts of the GR in the reproductive system [72,73].
Zebraﬁsh have also been utilized to study the actions of the GR. Reported models include the
use of morpholinos and a transgenic model harboring a point mutation in the DNA-binding
region [74,75]. In both zebraﬁsh models, disruption of GR signaling alters embryo development
and adult physiology, although an assessment of fertility was not reported. Zebraﬁsh offer a
promising alternative model for the study of glucocorticoid signaling in the reproductive tract
[76]. New gene editing techniques will expand our understanding of glucocorticoid signaling
through the ability to insert, delete, or replace DNA at precise regions of the genome and will
enable researchers to use other experimental animal models (Box 4).

Box 4. Insights from Non-classical Models
In most vertebrates studied, the exon length and amino acid sequence of the NR3C1 gene is well conserved and the
HPA response to a physiological stressor is intact [165]. Therefore, studies describing the impact of stress on
reproductive ﬁtness may provide insight into the evolutionarily conserved mechanisms linking fertility to glucocorticoid
signaling. Fertility in both male and female cheetahs is sensitive to the physiological stress that accompanies captivity.
Living arrangements on-exhibit compared with off-exhibit increased glucocorticoid concentrations, reduced total
mobile sperm number in males, and decreased ovarian cyclicity in females [166,167]. Heat stress leads to infertility
in dairy cows by inhibiting follicular development. Speciﬁcally, heat stress dramatically alters gene expression, reduces
estrogen synthesis, and induces apoptosis in the follicle-supporting granulosa cells [168]. In male zebra ﬁnches, fastingincreased levels of glucocorticoids were associated with decreased testicular parameters, including lower testosterone
and expression of steroidogenic enzymes, in the absence of hypothalamic input, indicating that glucocorticoids
integrate the cues from stress directly in the testis in this species [169]. As seen in rodent models, a single exposure
to dexamethasone decreased serum testosterone and expression of genes involved in cholesterol synthesis and
steroidogenesis in the stallion testis [170]. Dexamethasone exposure in breeder roosters decreased testosterone,
sperm motility, and sperm viability [171]. Further evidence for a conserved mechanism of glucocorticoid regulation of
steroidogenesis was demonstrated in the three-spot wrasse, Halichoeres trimaculatus [172]. In this species prolonged
exposure to cortisol induced female-to-male sex change and repression of plasma estradiol. Deciphering the mechanisms by which stress impacts fertility in other species is not only important in understanding the origin of infertility in
humans but also essential to alleviate the ﬁnancial consequences of infertility in agricultural species.

406

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Reproductive Immunology: Immunomodulatory Actions of Glucocorticoids
Endometrial receptivity and successful pregnancy require immune adaptations that precede
embryo implantation and allow the semiallogenic fetus to be tolerated (Figure 1A). During the
menstrual cycle and increasingly in early pregnancy, immune cells are recruited to and activated
in the endometrial compartment in a tightly regulated manner [77–79]. Conditional ablation of
NR3C1 in the mouse uterus demonstrated that glucocorticoid signaling in the endometrium is
essential for appropriate immune cell recruitment [53]. Studies utilizing exogenous glucocorticoid administration have also demonstrated effects on immune cell numbers and function in the
uterus [57]. Importantly, various immune cells are present in the uterus that work to create the
dynamic immune response essential for implantation and tolerance. Disturbances of this
immune balance are likely to contribute to the pathogenesis of miscarriage, preeclampsia,
or preterm labor. Direct actions on immune cells and indirect actions through signaling networks in the endometrium represent two mechanisms by which glucocorticoids can regulate
the uterine immune system. Uterine natural killer (uNK) cells, stemming from resident and
recruited populations, are the predominant immune cell population in the uterus at implantation, representing approximately 70% of all leucocytes [80,81]. During early pregnancy uNK
cells regulate trophoblast invasion and the vascular changes that support placental development. uNK cells express the GR, and uNK cell-mediated cytotoxicity is sensitive to cortisol
treatment [82,83]. Prednisolone treatment in women with recurrent miscarriage is associated
with reduced numbers of uNK cells, although a link between the glucocorticoid-mediated
reduction in uNK cell numbers and pregnancy success was not demonstrated [84]. Moreover,
uNK cells differ in function from circulating NK cells and the speciﬁc effects of glucocorticoids
on each of these populations have not been investigated.
Inﬁltrating monocytes that develop into macrophages and uterus-resident myeloid cells constitute the second largest population of immune cells in the uterus during early pregnancy [85].
Blastocyst

(A)

(B)

Elongated sperma

rus
Macrophage
De
Dendri
Treg

cell

Uterine natural
killer cell
Blood vessel

T cell

Round sperm
Sertoli
cell

d
Sertoli
celli

Secondary spermatocyte
Blood-tes
barrier

d

Primary spermatocyte

impl

Spermatogonia

T cell

Peritubular cell
Leydig cell

Macrophage
Mast cell
M1→M2

Dendri

cell
Treg

Blood vessel

Figure 1. Schematic Illustration of the Mammalian Uterus in Early Pregnancy (A) and the Seminiferous Tubule and Interstitium of the Testis (B). (A) Immune cells are
recruited and activated within the endometrium in response to pregnancy. Following implantation immune cells contribute to the endometrial and vascular remodeling
that is required to support pregnancy. (B) Under normal physiological conditions, immune cells are present in the interstitial compartment of the testis. Changes in the
cell junctions of the blood–testis barrier resulting from inﬂammation alter the exposure of immunoprivileged cells to cytokines and chemokines, resulting in activation of
apoptotic pathways.

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

407

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Macrophages exist as two distinct subpopulations: an M1 ‘proinﬂammatory’ phenotype and an
M2 phenotype linked to tissue remodeling, immunosuppression, and angiogenesis [86].
Endometrial macrophages are skewed toward the M1 phenotype during the peri-implantation
period and polarized toward the M2 phenotype post-implantation [87,88]. Human endometrial
macrophages express the GR during the secretory phase, corresponding to the period of
uterine receptivity and implantation, the menstrual phase, and at term, although the function of
glucocorticoid signaling in macrophages is not well understood [89,90]. Macrophage-speciﬁc
NR3C1-knockout mice have been generated using LysM Cre recombinase, although no
associated infertility has been reported [91].
Dendritic cells control the innate adaptive immune response, but mouse studies suggest that
they also contribute to uterine receptivity. Selective ablation of CD11c+ dendritic cells in the
murine uterus caused implantation failure, impaired stromal cell decidualization, and altered
angiogenesis, indicating that dendritic cells are important for the initiation of pregnancy [92].
Dendritic cells are antigen-presenting cells and play a key role in determining tolerance to or
rejection of the blastocyst. Regulatory T cells are critical for the maintenance of tolerance at the
maternal–fetal interface and are generated from CD4+ T cells through antigen presentation in
the thymus or uterus. Depletion of regulatory T cells in mice leads to pregnancy loss and fetal
resorption [93]. The relative abundance of another derivative of the CD4+ T cell, Th17 cells, has
been associated with miscarriage, although the importance of this immune cell type in normal
pregnancy has not been investigated [94]. Moreover, the physiological effects of glucocorticoids on dendritic cells, regulatory T cells, and Th17 cells in the endometrium have not been
studied. Dendritic cell-speciﬁc NR3C1-knockout mice have been utilized in models of sepsis
and arthritis but have not been evaluated for functions relating to fertility [95,96]. T cell-speciﬁc
ablation of NR3C1 has been reported, although Cre recombinase activity occurs early in T cell
development and prevents discrimination of the contribution of glucocorticoid signaling among
T cell subtypes [91].
Much like the uterus during pregnancy, immune cells present in the testis mediate the process
of spermatogenesis through a delicate balance of inﬂammation and immunotolerance
(Figure 1B) [97]. The testis is an immunoprivileged site by virtue of the blood–testis barrier
(BTB), systemic immune tolerance, and local immunosuppression, which protects the immunogenic germ cells against provoking an immune response [98]. However, effective local innate
immunity is required to prevent bacterial or viral infections in the testis. Cells of both the innate
and the adaptive immune response reside within the interstitial space of the testis and are able
to interact with the steroidogenic Leydig cells and the seminiferous tubules where spermatogenesis occurs. Under physiological conditions, subsets of dendritic cells and regulatory T cells
mediate tolerance to germ cells. Under inﬂammatory conditions, however, proinﬂammatory
cytokines produced by macrophages, dendritic cells, and effector T cells disrupt the BTB and
induce apoptosis of germ cells. To date there are no studies in humans or mouse models
assessing the impact of glucocorticoids on immune cells in the testis. Endocrine regulation of
the testicular immune system by androgens suggests that glucocorticoids may also have
indirect effects on immune cell functions.
In the peripheral immune system, glucocorticoids display various direct actions on immune cell
development and function, which may inﬂuence the relative pool of immune cells able to be
recruited to the reproductive tract [99]. Glucocorticoids prevent the generation of immature
dendritic cells from monocytes and inhibit the differentiation of immature dendritic cells into
mature dendritic cells in vitro [100,101]. High serum glucocorticoid levels induced by psychoactive drug administration were shown to be associated with rapid accumulation of mature NK
cells in the peripheral circulation in vivo [102]. Glucocorticoids also induce robust apoptosis of T
and B cells, mature dendritic cells, basophils, and eosinophils [103]. Glucocorticoids also

408

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Key Figure

Impact of Glucocorticoids on Reproductive Physiology.
nt
ﬃcie
Insu
g
alin
sign
ss
Exce
g
alin
sign

Inhibits
GnRH release
Synthesis/release of gonadotropins
KISS1 expression
va n
Ovarian growth factor expression
Testosterone produc n
E2-induced uterine growth
Immune cell recruitment/func n in uterus
Placental and fetal growth

Inhibits
Mammary epithelial cell prolif
on
Sperm produc n
Sertolicell number
Immune cell recruitment in uterus
Implanta n
Stromal celldecidualiza n
Fetal growth

+/Oocyte development
Ovarian steroidogenesis
Promotes
Func n of GnI Hneurons
Mural granulosa/cumulus cell apoptosis
Leydig/germ cell apoptosis
Fetal membrane rupture
Fetal development

Promotes
Testosterone produc

n

Timing of exposure
1st Trimester

2nd Trimester

Exposure leads to
placental/fetal growth
restri on

3rd Trimester

Exposure leads
to fetal
development

Exposure may
prevent or promote
vity
endometrial

(See figure legend on the bottom of the next page.)
Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

409

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

regulate the immune system by impacting the function of immune cells. For example, glucocorticoids inhibit the transcription of proinﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines in macrophages and drive macrophages toward the M2 phenotype [57]. Dexamethasone can also
induce components of the inﬂammasome to sensitize the innate immune response in macrophages [104]. The nature of the response to glucocorticoids in the immune system is dependent on physiological or stress-induced levels of hormone and the duration of the stimulus,
suggesting that the immune response governing reproduction is regulated in part through
physiological glucocorticoid signaling and is sensitive to hormone ﬂuctuations.

Concluding Remarks
Stress-induced activation of the HPA axis or administration of exogenous glucocorticoids
produces adverse effects on male and female fertility and negatively impacts in utero development. In models of adrenal insufﬁciency, the absence of glucocorticoids is also associated with
reduced fertility and disturbances of fetal growth. However, basal physiological concentrations
of glucocorticoids are supportive of all stages of reproduction, indicating that the dose is
critically important in the outcome. The timing of glucocorticoid exposure may also dictate
whether glucocorticoid signaling promotes or inhibits fertility. The tipping point between
supportive and adverse effects is unclear (Figure 2, Key Figure). For example, exogenous
glucocorticoids are utilized clinically during in vitro fertilization (IVF) and in patients with recurrent
miscarriage with the rationale that the immunomodulatory actions of glucocorticoids improve
the intrauterine environment [105,106]. Following conception, women may receive glucocorticoids during pregnancy as treatment for asthma, autoimmune diseases, or adrenal insufﬁciency or for the management of preterm labor [107–109]. Glucocorticoid use during preterm
labor critically improves neonatal outcomes through enhanced fetal development. However,
exposure to exogenous or stress-induced levels of glucocorticoids during the window of
receptivity or during fetal development may attenuate the maternal immune system required
to establish pregnancy and alter fetal development in utero. Evidence from animal studies
demonstrates that prenatal exposure to synthetic or stress-induced levels of glucocorticoids
leads to reduced fetal growth and dysfunction of the cardiovascular, metabolic, endocrine,
nervous, and reproductive systems in adults [26]. The effects of overexposure are dependent
on the dose and type of glucocorticoid and determined by the gestational age at exposure. In
humans prenatal glucocorticoid exposure is associated with higher blood pressure and insulin
levels and mild behavioral defects, although it is difﬁcult to separate the effects of glucocorticoid
exposure from the impact of premature birth [110]. Given the clear beneﬁts to fetal survival,
prenatal glucocorticoids are part of the standard management for women who present with
preterm labor. However, the additional beneﬁt of repeated treatment or the long-term consequences of exposure during early pregnancy remain uncertain and call for further investigation (see Outstanding Questions).

Outstanding Questions
The ovarian hormones and their receptors regulate reproductive functions
before and during pregnancy. Many
in vitro studies have demonstrated
dynamic molecular interplay in GR
and ER binding, and glucocorticoids
and estrogen regulate many common
genes. What role does the GR play in
mediating estrogen responses, if any?
Glucocorticoid sensitivity in the reproductive system may also be mediated
by the relative expression of the 11bHSD isoenzymes and the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR). Do glucocorticoids signal through the MR in the
normal physiology of reproduction or
the pathologies of adverse events?
Could 11b-HSD be a therapeutic target in women?
What are the signaling pathways regulated by glucocorticoids during parturition in humans and could our
knowledge of these improve pregnancy outcomes?
Antenatal corticosteroid administration
for fetal maturation is critical for survival
in preterm delivery. Recent updates
have shown that antenatal corticosteroids may be beneﬁcial in late-preterm
birth (34 to <37 weeks) and should
now be considered in treatment. What
is the magnitude of the beneﬁts or risk
of long-term effects in this population?
How is glucocorticoid signaling in
reproduction impacted by environmental exposures? Are there tissuespeciﬁc effects or long-term consequences? The stress response to environmental compounds may represent
a new adaptive mechanism to incorporate exposures into reproductive
ﬁtness.

Other deﬁcits in our current understanding of glucocorticoid functions in the reproductive
system stem from a lack of knowledge regarding the sites of direct GR action and the
crosstalk of glucocorticoids with other nuclear receptors. Glucocorticoids and estrogens
have exhibited antagonistic actions in the uterus [19,20]. The presence of estradiol with
dexamethasone alters GR recruitment to target genes in immortalized uterine cells and is

Figure 2. The impact of glucocorticoids on reproductive physiology is dependent on dose and timing. Both excess and insufﬁcient levels of glucocorticoids result in
reproductive dysfunction, although these occur through differing pathophysiologies. The timing of exposure also dictates the relative beneﬁt or harm of glucocorticoid
exposure. The example is provided in which early exposure to high levels of glucocorticoids may inhibit endometrial receptivity, although physiological levels of
glucocorticoids may be required for this process. Excess glucocorticoid exposure during early placentation is associated with reduced placental weight and fetal size.
However, glucocorticoid signaling in the third trimester is required for fetal development. Timing of exposure also plays a role in fetal programming of postnatal
development, with more profound inﬂuence occurring as a result of elevated glucocorticoids during the ﬁrst and second trimesters.

410

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

dependent on estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) [111]. It is unclear whether this molecular
antagonism is a result of direct interference with GR–DNA interactions and the biological
signiﬁcance of GR–ER crosstalk is not well understood. Glucocorticoids bind with low afﬁnity
to PR and, similarly, progesterone weakly binds GR [112,113]. The abortifacient drug RU486
acts as both an antiprogestin and an antiglucocorticoid, which prevents discrimination
between the GR- and PR-mediated effects in the uterus [114]. Cells in culture have provided
a genetically tractable model to dissect the relative contributions of GR and PR and suggest
crosstalk between progesterone and the GR in cells of the reproductive tract [115–118]. New
techniques utilizing cell-speciﬁc knockdown or targeted genome editing in vivo will help clarify
the speciﬁc roles of glucocorticoids in normal reproductive physiology and stress-induced
infertility. By identifying GR target genes in tissues of the reproductive tract and framing these
data in reference to published ChIP-seq databases, we will begin to provide a picture of the
regulatory networks that orchestrate fertility. Additionally, future studies should assess the
contribution of the NR3C1 isoforms, post-translational modiﬁcations, and SNPs in the
heterogeneity of stress responses among individuals. In the placenta GR isoform expression
varied between women who delivered with no complications at term and those who delivered
preterm [30]. Context-speciﬁc expression provides insight on the molecular mechanisms by
which stress impacts individuals uniquely. This knowledge is increasingly important for the
identiﬁcation of new avenues of treatment for infertility and potential new mechanisms to
enhance fertility in agricultural species.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr Robert Oakley and Dr Francesco DeMayo for their critical reading of the manuscript. This work was
supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/NIEHS and by from the NIH
(S.W.Grant R00ES022983) and an Albert McKern Scholar Award (S.W.).

References
1.

Erichsen, M.M. et al. (2010) Sexuality and fertility in women with
Addison’s disease. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 95, 4354–4360

2.

Kowal, B.F. et al. (2006) Addison’s disease presenting as male
infertility. Fertil. Steril. 85, 1059 e1051–e1054

3.

Oakley, R.H. and Cidlowski, J.A. (2011) Cellular processing of
the glucocorticoid receptor gene and protein: new mechanisms
for generating tissue-speciﬁc actions of glucocorticoids. J. Biol.
Chem. 286, 3177–3184

4.

Dagklis, T. et al. (2015) Common features and differences of the
hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis in male and female. Gynecol. Endocrinol. 31, 14–17

5.

Whirledge, S. and Cidlowski, J.A. (2013) A role for glucocorticoids in stress-impaired reproduction: beyond the hypothalamus and pituitary. Endocrinology 154, 4450–4468

6.

Breen, K.M. and Mellon, P.L. (2014) Inﬂuence of stress-induced
intermediates on gonadotropin gene expression in gonadotrope
cells. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 385, 71–77

7.

Geraghty, A.C. and Kaufer, D. (2015) Glucocorticoid regulation
of reproduction. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 872, 253–278

8.

Takumi, K. et al. (2012) Immunohistochemical analysis of the
colocalization of corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor and
glucocorticoid receptor in kisspeptin neurons in the hypothalamus of female rats. Neurosci. Lett. 531, 40–45

9.

Luo, E. et al. (2016) Corticosterone blocks ovarian cyclicity and
the LH surge via decreased kisspeptin neuron activation in
female mice. Endocrinology 157, 1187–1199

10. Ubuka, T. et al. (2009) Identiﬁcation of human GnIH homologs,
RFRP-1 and RFRP-3, and the cognate receptor, GPR147 in the
human hypothalamic pituitary axis. PLoS One 4, e8400
11. Clarke, I.J. et al. (2016) Stress increases gonadotropin inhibitory
hormone cell activity and input to GnRH cells in ewes. Endocrinology 157, 4339–4350
12. Kirby, E.D. et al. (2009) Stress increases putative gonadotropin
inhibitory hormone and decreases luteinizing hormone in male
rats. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 11324–11329

13. Son, Y.L. et al. (2014) Molecular basis for the activation of
gonadotropin-inhibitory hormone gene transcription by corticosterone. Endocrinology 155, 1817–1826
14. Yuan, X.H. et al. (2014) Dexamethasone altered steroidogenesis
and changed redox status of granulosa cells. Endocrine 47,
639–647
15. Huang, T.J. and Shirley Li, P. (2001) Dexamethasone inhibits
luteinizing hormone-induced synthesis of steroidogenic acute
regulatory protein in cultured rat preovulatory follicles. Biol.
Reprod. 64, 163–170
16. Michael, A.E. et al. (1993) Direct inhibition of ovarian steroidogenesis by cortisol and the modulatory role of 11 b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. Clin. Endocrinol. 38, 641–644
17. Yuan, H.J. et al. (2016) Glucocorticoids impair oocyte developmental potential by triggering apoptosis of ovarian cells via
activating the Fas system. Sci. Rep. 6, 24036
18. da Costa, N.N. et al. (2016) Effect of cortisol on bovine oocyte
maturation and embryo development in vitro. Theriogenology
85, 323–329
19. Rhen, T. et al. (2003) Dexamethasone blocks the rapid biological
effects of 17b-estradiol in the rat uterus without antagonizing its
global genomic actions. FASEB J. 17, 1849–1870
20. Johnson, D.C. and Dey, S.K. (1980) Role of histamine in implantation: dexamethasone inhibits estradiol-induced implantation in
the rat. Biol. Reprod. 22, 1136–1141
21. Whirledge, S. et al. (2013) Global gene expression analysis in
human uterine epithelial cells deﬁnes new targets of glucocorticoid and estradiol antagonism. Biol. Reprod. 89, 66
22. Nanjappa, M.K. et al. (2015) Maximal dexamethasone inhibition
of luminal epithelial proliferation involves progesterone receptor
(PR)- and non-PR-mediated mechanisms in neonatal mouse
uterus. Biol. Reprod. 92, 122
23. Kuroda, K. et al. (2013) Induction of 11b-HSD 1 and activation of
distinct mineralocorticoid receptor- and glucocorticoid

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

411

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

receptor-dependent gene networks in decidualizing human
endometrial stromal cells. Mol. Endocrinol. 27, 192–202

angiotensin–aldosterone system in 6-month offspring. Physiol.
Rep. 4, e12754

24. Zhang, D. et al. (2016) Glucocorticoid exposure in early placentation induces preeclampsia in rats via interfering trophoblast
development. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 225, 61–70

46. O’sullivan, L. et al. (2015) Excess prenatal corticosterone exposure results in albuminuria, sex-speciﬁc hypotension, and
altered heart rate responses to restraint stress in aged adult
mice. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 308, F1065–F1073

25. Braun, T. et al. (2015) Early dexamethasone treatment induces
placental apoptosis in sheep. Reprod. Sci. 22, 47–59
26. Fowden, A.L. and Forhead, A.J. (2015) Glucocorticoids as
regulatory signals during intrauterine development. Exp. Physiol.
100, 1477–1487
27. Vaughan, O.R. et al. (2015) Corticosterone alters materno-fetal
glucose partitioning and insulin signalling in pregnant mice. J.
Physiol. 593, 1307–1321
28. Ozmen, A. et al. (2015) Glucocorticoid exposure altered angiogenic factor expression via Akt/mTOR pathway in rat placenta.
Ann. Anat. 198, 34–40
29. Yang, Q. et al. (2016) Compartmentalized localization of 11bHSD 1 and 2 at the feto-maternal interface in the ﬁrst trimester of
human pregnancy. Placenta 46, 63–71
30. Saif, Z. et al. (2015) Expression of eight glucocorticoid receptor
isoforms in the human preterm placenta vary with fetal sex and
birthweight. Placenta 36, 723–730
31. Li, X.Q. et al. (2014) Roles of glucocorticoids in human parturition: a controversial fact? Placenta 35, 291–296
32. Laloha, F. et al. (2015) Effect of intravenous dexamethasone on
preparing the cervix and labor induction. Acta Med. Iran. 53,
568–572
33. Wang, W. et al. (2015) Phosphorylation of STAT3 mediates the
induction of cyclooxygenase-2 by cortisol in the human amnion
at parturition. Sci. Signal. 8, ra106
34. Challis, J.R.G. et al. (2000) Endocrine and paracrine regulation
of birth at term and preterm. Endocr. Rev. 21, 514–550
35. Wang, W. et al. (2016) Induction of amnion epithelial apoptosis
by cortisol via tPA/plasmin system. Endocrinology 157, 4487–
4498
36. Gopalakrishnan, G.S. (2004) Programming of adult cardiovascular function after early maternal undernutrition in sheep. Am. J.
Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 287, R12–R20

47. Cuffe, J.S. et al. (2017) Prenatal corticosterone exposure programs sex-speciﬁc adrenal adaptations in mouse offspring. J.
Endocrinol. 232, 37–48
48. Sun, Y. et al. (2016) Prenatal dexamethasone exposure
increases the susceptibility to autoimmunity in offspring rats
by epigenetic programing of glucocorticoid receptor. Biomed.
Res. Int. 2016, 9409452
49. Silva, E.J. et al. (2014) Impact of adrenalectomy and dexamethasone treatment on testicular morphology and sperm parameters in rats: insights into the adrenal control of male
reproduction. Andrology 2, 835–846
50. Gao, H.B. et al. (1996) Suppression of endogenous corticosterone levels in vivo increases the steroidogenic capacity of puriﬁed rat Leydig cells in vitro. Endocrinology 137, 1714–1718
51. Panza, S. et al. (2016) Glucocorticoid receptor as a potential
target to decrease aromatase expression and inhibit Leydig
tumor growth. Am. J. Pathol. 186, 1328–1339
52. Cole, T.J. et al. (1995) Targeted disruption of the glucocorticoid
receptor gene blocks adrenergic chromafﬁn cell development
and severely retards lung maturation. Genes Dev. 9, 1608–1621
53. Whirledge, S.D. et al. (2015) Uterine glucocorticoid receptors
are critical for fertility in mice through control of embryo implantation and decidualization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112,
15166–15171
54. Hazra, R. et al. (2014) In vivo actions of the Sertoli cell glucocorticoid receptor. Endocrinology 155, 1120–1130
55. Wintermantel, T.M. et al. (2005) The epithelial glucocorticoid
receptor is required for the normal timing of cell proliferation
during mammary lobuloalveolar development but is dispensable
for milk production. Mol. Endocrinol. 19, 340–349
56. Zhao, B. et al. (2014) Glucocorticoid receptor in prostate epithelia is not required for corticosteroid-induced epithelial hyperproliferation in the mouse prostate. Prostate 74, 1068–1078

37. De Blasio, M.J. et al. (2007) Maternal exposure to dexamethasone or cortisol in early pregnancy differentially alters insulin
secretion and glucose homeostasis in adult male sheep offspring. Am. J Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 293, E75–E82

57. Robertson, S.A. et al. (2016) Corticosteroid therapy in assisted
reproduction – immune suppression is a faulty premise. Hum.
Reprod. 31, 2164–2173

38. Slotkin, T.A. et al. (1996) Programming of brainstem serotonin
transporter development by prenatal glucocorticoids. Brain Res.
Dev. Brain Res. 93, 155–161

58. Kingsley-Kallesen, M. (2002) The mineralocorticoid receptor
may compensate for the loss of the glucocorticoid receptor
at speciﬁc stages of mammary gland development. Mol. Endocrinol. 16, 2008–2018

39. Pechnick, R.N. et al. (2006) Developmental exposure to corticosterone: behavioral changes and differential effects on leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and corticotropin-releasing hormone
(CRH) gene expression in the mouse. Psychopharmacology
185, 76–83
40. Fowden, A.L. et al. (2016) Glucocorticoid programming of intrauterine development. Domest. Anim. Endocrinol. 56 (Suppl),
S121–S132
41. Holmes, M.C. et al. (2015) Fetal programming of adult behaviour
by stress and glucocorticoids. Psychoneuroendocrinology 61, 9
42. Carpenter, T. et al. (2017) Sex differences in early-life programming of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis in humans suggest increased vulnerability in females: a systematic review. J.
Dev. Orig. Health Dis. Published online January 20, 2017. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S204017441600074X
43. Gillies, G.E. et al. (2016) Enduring, sexually dimorphic impact of
in utero exposure to elevated levels of glucocorticoids on midbrain dopaminergic populations. Brain Sci. Published online
30,
2016.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
December
brainsci7010005

59. Reichardt, H.M. et al. (2001) Mammary gland development and
lactation are controlled by different glucocorticoid receptor
activities. Eur. J. Endocrinol. 145, 519–527
60. Jewell, C.M. et al. (2012) Complex human glucocorticoid receptor dim mutations deﬁne glucocorticoid induced apoptotic resistance in bone cells. Mol. Endocrinol. 26, 244–256
61. Mittelstadt, P.R. and Ashwell, J.D. (2003) Disruption of glucocorticoid receptor exon 2 yields a ligand-responsive C-terminal
fragment that regulates gene expression. Mol. Endocrinol. 17,
1534–1542
62. Casey, T.M. and Plaut, K. (2007) The role of glucocorticoids in
secretory activation and milk secretion, a historical perspective.
J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia 12, 293–304
63. Kotelevtsev, Y. et al. (1997) 11b-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 knockout mice show attenuated glucocorticoidinducible responses and resist hyperglycemia on obesity or
stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 14924–14929
64. Kotelevtsev, Y. et al. (1999) Hypertension in mice lacking 11bhydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2. J. Clin. Invest. 103, 683–
689

44. Hiroi, R. et al. (2016) Sex-dependent programming effects of
prenatal glucocorticoid treatment on the developing serotonin
system and stress-related behaviors in adulthood. Neuroscience 320, 43–56

65. Lavery, G.G. et al. (2012) Lack of signiﬁcant metabolic abnormalities in mice with liver-speciﬁc disruption of 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1. Endocrinology 153, 3236–3248

45. Cuffe, J.S. et al. (2016) Maternal corticosterone exposure in the
mouse programs sex-speciﬁc renal adaptations in the renin–

66. Wyrwoll, C. et al. (2015) Fetal brain 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 selectively determines programming of adult

412

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

depressive-like behaviors and cognitive function, but not anxiety
behaviors in male mice. Psychoneuroendocrinology 59, 59–70
67. Mullins, L.J. et al. (2015) Mineralocorticoid excess or glucocorticoid insufﬁciency: renal and metabolic phenotypes in a rat
Hsd11b2 knockout model. Hypertension 66, e20
68. Thompson, A. et al. (2002) Spatial and temporal patterns of
expression of 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase types 1 and 2
messenger RNA and glucocorticoid receptor protein in the
murine placenta and uterus during late pregnancy. Biol. Reprod.
67, 1708–1718
69. Wyrwoll, C.S. et al. (2009) Altered placental function of 11bhydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2 knockout mice. Endocrinology
150, 1287–1293
70. Tronche, F. et al. (1999) Disruption of the glucocorticoid receptor gene in the nervous system results in reduced anxiety. Nat.
Genet. 23, 99–103
71. Oakley, R.H. et al. (2013) Essential role of stress hormone
signaling in cardiomyocytes for the prevention of heart disease.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 17035–17040
72. Jeanneteau, F.D. et al. (2012) BDNF and glucocorticoids
regulate corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) homeostasis
in the hypothalamus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109, 1305–
1310
73. Brewer, J.A. et al. (2003) T-cell glucocorticoid receptor is
required to suppress COX-2-mediated lethal immune activation.
Nat. Med. 9, 1318–1322
74. Pikulkaew, S. et al. (2011) The knockdown of maternal glucocorticoid receptor mRNA alters embryo development in zebraﬁsh. Dev. Dyn. 240, 874–889
75. Grifﬁths, B.B. et al. (2012) A zebraﬁsh model of glucocorticoid
resistance shows serotonergic modulation of the stress
response. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 6, 68
76. Hoo, J.Y. et al. (2016) Zebraﬁsh: a versatile animal model for
fertility research. Biomed Res. Int. 2016, 9732780
77. Zhang, J. et al. (2016) To serve and to protect: the role of
decidual innate immune cells on human pregnancy. Cell Tissue
Res. 363, 249–265

90. Horton, J.S. et al. (2011) Relaxin modulates proinﬂammatory
cytokine secretion from human decidual macrophages. Biol.
Reprod. 85, 788–797
91. Tuckermann, J.P. et al. (2007) Macrophages and neutrophils are
the targets for immune suppression by glucocorticoids in contact allergy. J. Clin. Invest. 117, 1381–1390
92. Plaks, V. et al. (2008) Uterine DCs are crucial for decidua
formation during embryo implantation in mice. J. Clin. Invest.
118, 3954–3965
93. Aluvihare, V.R. et al. (2004) Regulatory T cells mediate maternal
tolerance to the fetus. Nat. Immunol. 5, 266–271
94. Wang, W.J. et al. (2010) Increased prevalence of T helper 17
(Th17) cells in peripheral blood and decidua in unexplained
recurrent spontaneous abortion patients. J. Reprod. Immunol.
84, 164–170
95. Li, C.C. et al. (2015) Suppression of dendritic cell-derived IL-12
by endogenous glucocorticoids is protective in LPS-induced
sepsis. PLoS Biol. 13, e1002269
96. Baschant, U. et al. (2011) Glucocorticoid therapy of antigeninduced arthritis depends on the dimerized glucocorticoid
receptor in T cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108,
19317–19322
97. Perez, C.V. et al. (2013) Dual role of immune cells in the testis:
protective or pathogenic for germ cells? Spermatogenesis 3,
e23870
98. Zhao, S. et al. (2014) Testicular defense systems: immune
privilege and innate immunity. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 11, 428–437
99. Busillo, J.M. and Cidlowski, J.A. (2013) The ﬁve Rs of glucocorticoid action during inﬂammation: ready, reinforce, repress,
resolve, and restore. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 24, 109–119
100. Woltman, A.M. et al. (2000) The effect of calcineurin inhibitors
and corticosteroids on the differentiation of human dendritic
cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 30, 1807–1812
101. Matasic, R. et al. (1999) Dexamethasone inhibits dendritic cell
maturation by redirecting differentiation of a subset of cells. J.
Leukoc. Biol. 66, 909–914

78. Figueiredo, A.S. and Schumacher, A. (2016) The T helper type
17/regulatory T cell paradigm in pregnancy. Immunology 148,
13–21

102. Bigler, M.B. et al. (2015) Stress-induced in vivo recruitment of
human cytotoxic natural killer cells favors subsets with distinct
receptor proﬁles and associates with increased epinephrine
levels. PLoS One 10, e0145635

79. Vinketova, K. et al. (2016) Human decidual stromal cells as a
component of the implantation niche and a modulator of maternal immunity. J. Pregnancy 2016, 8689436

103. Cruz-Topete, D. and Cidlowski, J.A. (2015) One hormone, two
actions: anti- and pro-inﬂammatory effects of glucocorticoids.
Neuroimmunomodulation 22, 20–32

80. Mori, M. et al. (2016) The decidua – the maternal bed embracing
the embryo – maintains the pregnancy. Semin. Immunopathol.
38, 635–649

104. Busillo, J.M. et al. (2011) Glucocorticoids sensitize the innate
immune system through regulation of the NLRP3 inﬂammasome. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 38703–38713

81. Bartmann, C. et al. (2014) Quantiﬁcation of the predominant
immune cell populations in decidua throughout human pregnancy. Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 71, 109–119

105. Polak de Fried, E. et al. (1993) Improvement of clinical pregnancy rate and implantation rate of in-vitro fertilization–embryo
transfer patients by using methylprednisone. Hum. Reprod. 8,
393–395

82. Henderson, T.A. et al. (2003) Steroid receptor expression in
uterine natural killer cells. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 88, 440–
449
83. Chen, Y. et al. (2012) Mifepristone increases the cytotoxicity of
uterine natural killer cells by acting as a glucocorticoid antagonist via ERK activation. PLoS One 7, e36413
84. Quenby, S. et al. (2005) Prednisolone reduces preconceptual
endometrial natural killer cells in women with recurrent miscarriage. Fertil. Steril. 84, 980–984
85. Trundley, A. et al. (2006) Methods for isolation of cells from the
human fetal–maternal interface. Methods Mol. Med. 122, 109–
122

106. Quenby, S. et al. (2003) Successful pregnancy outcome following 19 consecutive miscarriages: case report. Hum. Reprod. 18,
2562–2564
107. Breton, M.C. et al. (2010) Risk of perinatal mortality associated
with inhaled corticosteroid use for the treatment of asthma
during pregnancy. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 126, 772–777
108. Ponticelli, C. and Moroni, G. (2015) Immunosuppression in
pregnant women with systemic lupus erythematosus. Expert
Rev. Clin. Immunol. 11, 549–552
109. Msan, A.K. et al. (2015) Use of antenatal corticosteroids in the
management of preterm delivery. Am. J. Perinatol. 32, 417–426

86. Porta, C. et al. (2015) Molecular and epigenetic basis of macrophage polarized activation. Semin. Immunol. 27, 237–248

110. Harris, A. and Seckl, J. (2011) Glucocorticoids, prenatal stress
and the programming of disease. Horm. Behav. 59, 279–289

87. Gustafsson, C. et al. (2008) Gene expression proﬁling of human
decidual macrophages: evidence for immunosuppressive phenotype. PLoS One 3, e2078

111. Whirledge, S. and Cidlowski, J.A. (2013) Estradiol antagonism of
glucocorticoid-induced GILZ expression in human uterine epithelial cells and murine uterus. Endocrinology 154, 499–510

88. Heikkinen, J. et al. (2003) Phenotypic characterization of human
decidual macrophages. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 131, 498–505

112. Haslam, S.Z. et al. (1981) An empirical basis for the competition
by dexamethasone to progesterone receptors as estimated with
the synthetic progestin R5020. J. Recept. Res. 2, 435–451

89. Thiruchelvam, U. et al. (2016) Cortisol regulates the paracrine
action of macrophages by inducing vasoactive gene expression
in endometrial cells. J. Leukoc. Biol. 99, 1165–1171

113. Attardi, B.J. et al. (2007) Comparison of progesterone and
glucocorticoid receptor binding and stimulation of gene expression by progesterone, 17-a hydroxyprogesterone caproate, and

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

413

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

related progestins. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 197, 599 e591–
e597
114. Schreiber, J.R. et al. (1983) Binding of the anti-progestin RU486 to rat ovary steroid receptors. Contraception 28, 77–85
115. Lei, K. et al. (2012) Progesterone acts via the nuclear glucocorticoid receptor to suppress IL-1b-induced COX-2 expression in
human term myometrial cells. PLoS One 7, e50167
116. Leo, J.C. et al. (2004) Glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid
cross-talk with progesterone receptor to induce focal adhesion
and growth inhibition in breast cancer cells. Endocrinology 145,
1314–1321
117. Louw-du Toit, R. (2014) Medroxyprogesterone acetate differentially regulates interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-10 in a human ectocervical epithelial cell line in a glucocorticoid receptor (GR)dependent manner. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 31136–31149
118. Lei, K. et al. (2015) Progesterone and the repression of myometrial inﬂammation: the roles of MKP-1 and the AP-1 system.
Mol. Endocrinol. 29, 1454–1467
119. Sawchenko, P.E. (1987) Evidence for a local site of action for
glucocorticoids in inhibiting CRF and vasopressin expression in
the paraventricular nucleus. Brain Res. 403, 213–223
120. Plotsky, P.M. et al. (1986) Inhibition of immunoreactive corticotropin-releasing factor secretion into the hypophysial–portal circulation by delayed glucocorticoid feedback. Endocrinology
119, 1126–1130
121. Aguilera, G. (1994) Regulation of pituitary ACTH secretion during
chronic stress. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 15, 321–350
122. Daughaday, W.H. (1956) Binding of corticosteroids by plasma
proteins. II. Paper electrophoresis and equilibrium paper electrophoresis. J. Clin. Invest. 35, 1434–1438
123. Baker, M.E. (2002) Albumin, steroid hormones and the origin of
vertebrates. J. Endocrinol. 175, 121–127
124. Weitzman, E.D. et al. (1971) Twenty-four hour pattern of the
episodic secretion of cortisol in normal subjects. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 33, 14–22
125. Wood, P.J. et al. (1997) Evidence for the low dose dexamethasone suppression test to screen for Cushing’s syndrome –
recommendations for a protocol for biochemistry laboratories.
Ann. Clin. Biochem. 34, 222–229
126. Pariante, C.M. (2008) The role of multi-drug resistance p-glycoprotein in glucocorticoid function: studies in animals and relevance in humans. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 583, 263–271
127. Woods, C. and Tomlinson, J.W. (2015) The dehydrogenase
hypothesis. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 872, 353–380
128. Wira, C. and Munck, A. (1970) Speciﬁc glucocorticoid receptors
in thymus cells. Localization in the nucleus and extraction of the
cortisol–receptor complex. J. Biol. Chem. 245, 3436–3438
129. Bamberger, C.M. et al. (1995) Glucocorticoid receptor beta, a
potential endogenous inhibitor of glucocorticoid action in
humans. J. Clin. Invest. 95, 2435–2441
130. Oakley, R.H. et al. (1996) The human glucocorticoid receptor
beta isoform Expression, biochemical properties, and putative
function. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 9550–9559
131. Moalli, P.A. et al. (1993) Alternatively spliced glucocorticoid
receptor messenger RNAs in glucocorticoid-resistant human
multiple myeloma cells. Cancer Res. 53, 3877–3879
132. Rivers, C. et al. (1999) Insertion of an amino acid in the DNAbinding domain of the glucocorticoid receptor as a result of
alternative splicing. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 84, 4283–4286
133. Hollenberg, S.M. (1985) Primary structure and expression of a
functional human glucocorticoid receptor cDNA. Nature 318,
635–641
134. Kino, T. et al. (2009) Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) beta has
intrinsic, GRa-independent transcriptional activity. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 381, 671–675
135. He, B. et al. (2015) Human glucocorticoid receptor beta regulates gluconeogenesis and inﬂammation in mouse liver. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 36, 714–730
136. Ray, D.W. et al. (1996) Glucocorticoid receptor structure and
function in glucocorticoid-resistant small cell lung carcinoma
cells. Cancer Res. 56, 3276–3280

414

137. Meijsing, S.H. et al. (2009) DNA binding site sequence directs
glucocorticoid receptor structure and activity. Science 324,
407–410
138. Thomas-Chollier, M. (2013) A naturally occurring insertion of a
single amino acid rewires transcriptional regulation by glucocorticoid receptor isoforms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110,
17826–17831
139. Morgan, D.J. et al. (2016) Glucocorticoid receptor isoforms
direct distinct mitochondrial programs to regulate ATP production. Sci. Rep. 6, 26419
140. Gaitan, D. et al. (1995) Glucocorticoid receptor structure and
function in an adrenocorticotropin-secreting small cell lung cancer. Mol. Endocrinol. 9, 1193–1201
141. Lu, N.Z. and Cidlowski, J.A. (2005) Translational regulatory
mechanisms generate N-terminal glucocorticoid receptor isoforms with unique transcriptional target genes. Mol. Cell 18,
331–342
142. Lu, N.Z. et al. (2007) Selective regulation of bone cell apoptosis
by translational isoforms of the glucocorticoid receptor. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 27, 7143–7160
143. Nehme, A. et al. (2009) Glucocorticoids with different chemical
structures but similar glucocorticoid receptor potency regulate
subsets of common and unique genes in human trabecular
meshwork cells. BMC Med. Genomics 2, 58
144. Gross, K.L. et al. (2011) Glucocorticoid receptor alpha isoformselective regulation of antiapoptotic genes in osteosarcoma
cells: a new mechanism for glucocorticoid resistance. Mol.
Endocrinol. 25, 1087–1099
145. Song, I.H. and Buttgereit, F. (2006) Non-genomic glucocorticoid
effects to provide the basis for new drug developments. Mol.
Cell. Endocrinol. 246, 142–146
146. Nahar, J. et al. (2015) Rapid nongenomic glucocorticoid actions
in male mouse hypothalamic neuroendocrine cells are dependent on the nuclear glucocorticoid receptor. Endocrinology 156,
2831–2842
147. Nahar, J. et al. (2016) Further evidence for a membrane receptor
that binds glucocorticoids in the rodent hypothalamus. Steroids
114, 33–40
148. Starick, S.R. et al. (2015) ChIP-exo signal associated with DNAbinding motifs provides insight into the genomic binding of the
glucocorticoid receptor and cooperating transcription factors.
Genome Res. 25, 825–835
149. Surjit, M. et al. (2011) Widespread negative response elements
mediate direct repression by agonist-liganded glucocorticoid
receptor. Cell 145, 224–241
150. Gupte, R. et al. (2013) Glucocorticoid receptor represses proinﬂammatory genes at distinct steps of the transcription cycle.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 14616–14621
151. Lu, N.Z. and Cidlowski, J.A. (2006) Glucocorticoid receptor
isoforms generate transcription speciﬁcity. Trends Cell Biol.
16, 301–307
152. Ramamoorthy, S. and Cidlowski, J.A. (2016) Corticosteroids:
mechanisms of action in health and disease. Rheum. Dis. Clin.
North Am. 42, 15–31
153. Barnes, P.J. (2009) Histone deacetylase-2 and airway disease.
Ther. Adv. Respir. Dis. 3, 235–243
154. Trotter, K.W. et al. (2015) Glucocorticoid receptor transcriptional
activation via the BRG1-dependent recruitment of TOP2b and
Ku70/86. Mol. Cell. Biol. 35, 2799–2817
155. Grontved, L. et al. (2013) C/EBP maintains chromatin accessibility in liver and facilitates glucocorticoid receptor recruitment to
steroid response elements. EMBO J. 32, 1568–1583
156. Jones, C.L. et al. (2014) Loss of TBL1XR1 disrupts glucocorticoid receptor recruitment to chromatin and results in glucocorticoid resistance in a B-lymphoblastic leukemia model. J. Biol.
Chem. 289, 20502–20515
157. Goi, C. et al. (2013) Cell-type and transcription factor speciﬁc
enrichment of transcriptional cofactor motifs in ENCODE ChIPseq data. BMC Genomics 14 (Suppl. 5), S2
158. Smith, C.L. and O’Malley, B.W. (2004) Coregulator function: a
key to understanding tissue speciﬁcity of selective receptor
modulators. Endocr. Rev. 25, 45–71

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

159. John, S. et al. (2011) Chromatin accessibility pre-determines
glucocorticoid receptor binding patterns. Nat. Genet. 43, 264–
268

166. Wells, A. et al. (2004) The stress response to environmental
change in captive cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus). J. Zoo Wildl.
Med. 35, 8–14

160. John, S. et al. (2008) Interaction of the glucocorticoid receptor
with the chromatin landscape. Mol. Cell 29, 611–624

167. Koester, D.C. et al. (2015) Motile sperm output by male cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus) managed ex situ is inﬂuenced by public
exposure and number of care-givers. PLoS One 10, e0135847

161. Koper, J.W. et al. (2014) Glucocorticoid receptor polymorphisms and haplotypes and their expression in health and disease. Steroids 92, 62–73
162. Konstantakou, P. et al. (2017) Dysregulation of 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases: implications during pregnancy and
beyond. J. Matern. Fetal Neonatal Med. 30, 284–293
163. Lutz, S.Z. et al. (2016) Genetic variation in the 11b-hydroxysteroid-dehydrogenase 1 gene determines NAFLD and visceral
obesity. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 101, 4743–4751

168. Li, L. et al. (2016) The effect of heat stress on gene expression,
synthesis of steroids, and apoptosis in bovine granulosa cells.
Cell Stress Chaperones 21, 467–475
169. Lynn, S.E. et al. (2015) Food, stress, and circulating testosterone: cue integration by the testes, not the brain, in male zebra
ﬁnches (Taeniopygia guttata). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 215, 1–9
170. Ing, N.H. et al. (2014) Dexamethasone acutely down-regulates
genes involved in steroidogenesis in stallion testes. J. Steroid
Biochem. Mol. Biol. 143, 451–459

164. Ragnarsson, O. et al. (2014) Common genetic variants in the
glucocorticoid receptor and the 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 genes inﬂuence long-term cognitive impairments
in patients with Cushing’s syndrome in remission. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 99, E1803–E1807

171. Min, Y. et al. (2016) Vitamin C and vitamin E supplementation
alleviates oxidative stress induced by dexamethasone and
improves fertility of breeder roosters. Anim. Reprod. Sci. 171,
1–6

165. Stolte, E.H. et al. (2006) Evolution of glucocorticoid receptors
with different glucocorticoid sensitivity. J. Endocrinol. 190,
17–28

172. Nozu, R. and Nakamura, M. (2015) Cortisol administration
induces sex change from ovary to testis in the protogynous
wrasse, Halichoeres trimaculatus. Sex. Dev. 9, 118–124

Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism, Month Year, Vol. , No. yy

415

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

