Human Immunology 79 (2018) 693–701

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Human Immunology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/humimm

Review

Implications of uterine NK cells and regulatory T cells in the endometrium of
infertile women
Louise Kofoda, Anette Lindhardb, Thomas Vauvert F. Hviida,

T

⁎

a

Centre for Immune Regulation and Reproductive Immunology (CIRRI), The ReproHealth Research Consortium ZUH, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Zealand
University Hospital, and Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
b
The Fertility Clinic, The ReproHealth Research Consortium ZUH, Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Zealand University Hospital, and Department of Clinical
Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

A R T I C LE I N FO

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Endometrium
Infertility
NK cells
Tregs
HLA-G

A range of studies have shown that the complex process of implantation and an establishment of a pregnancy
also involves immune factors. Disturbances in these underlying immune mechanisms might lead to implantation
and pregnancy failure and may be involved in the pathogenesis of unexplained infertility. Several studies have
reported that imbalances in uterine NK (uNK) cell abundance are associated with infertility; however, controversies exist. An increased amount of CD56+ uNK cells along with a decrease in CD16+ uNK cells have been
associated with normal fertility in some studies. Very few studies of FoxP3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) in the preimplantation endometrium have been performed. Results are sparse and controversial, studies reporting both
increased and decreased numbers of Tregs, respectively, in women suﬀering from infertility. In conclusion,
studies imply that uNK cells, Tregs and HLA-G carry pivotal roles regarding the establishment of a healthy
pregnancy, and that abnormal immune mechanisms involving these parameters may be associated with infertility. However, more research in early phases of the reproductive cycle, such as investigating the conditions
in the endometrium before implantation, is needed to further clarify the underlying mechanisms.

1. Introduction
The capability for humans to reproduce is limited, not only by age.
Some couples face diﬃculties on their way of obtaining a pregnancy
that others do not. Infertility is deﬁned as the inability of a couple to
obtain a pregnancy leading to a birth of a live newborn, after one year
of unprotected intercourse with regular frequency. Of couples in the
reproductive age, 10–15% suﬀer from infertility [1,2]. Causes can be
parental genetic abnormalities, maternal endocrine or metabolic disorders, genital tract infections, abnormal fallopian tubes, ovulation
defect or reduced semen count. However, in 8–28% of the cases the
cause remains unknown, which hampers the choice of the right assisted
reproductive technology (ART) [3]. For patients as well as clinicians,

the fact that not being able to identify the underlying reason is frustrating in several aspects: dealing with a condition without knowing the
cause, and not at least, an unknown prognosis of ART.
In an immunological context, mammalian pregnancy is a unique
phenomenon in which the mother carries a semi-allogenic embryo. To
accept the paternal alloantigens during pregnancy, the maternal immune cells must acquire a transient state of tolerance, and unique immune mechanisms are required for obtaining a successful pregnancy.
Therefore, altered immunological responses and modulation, and, in
line with this, compromised endometrial receptivity, have been thought
to play a role in reproductive problems such as infertility [4–6]. Research performed so far suggests an imbalance in endometrial leukocyte
population numbers and activity among women suﬀering from

Abbreviations: ADCC, antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity; ART, assisted reproductive technology; dNK cells, decidual natural killer cells; CTLA-4,
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4; EVT, extra-villous trophoblast; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage-colony-stimulating factor; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; HO-1, haem oxygenase isoform 1; IL, interleukin; ILT, immunoglobulin-like transcript; INF-γ, interferon gamma; IPEX,
immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked; IUGR, intrauterine growth retardation; IVF, in vitro fertilization; KIR, killer cell immunoglobulinlike receptor; LH, luteinizing hormone; LIF, leukaemia inhibitory factor; M-CSF, macrophage-colony-stimulating factor; NCR, natural cytotoxicity receptors; NK cells,
natural killer cells; RM, recurrent miscarriage; sHLA-G, soluble human leukocyte antigen-G; TGF-β, transforming growth factor beta; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor
alpha; Tregs, regulatory T cells; uNK cells, uterine natural killer cells; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor
⁎
Corresponding author at: Department of Clinical Biochemistry, The ReproHealth Research Consortium ZUH, Centre for Immune Regulation and Reproductive
Immunology (CIRRI), Zealand University Hospital and Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, 10 Sygehusvej, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark.
E-mail address: tvh@regionsjaelland.dk (T.V.F. Hviid).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2018.07.003
Received 14 March 2018; Received in revised form 2 July 2018; Accepted 6 July 2018
Available online 07 July 2018
0198-8859/ © 2018 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Human Immunology 79 (2018) 693–701

L. Kofod et al.

the leukocytes are suggested to be directly involved in maternal recognition of the placenta through leukocyte expression of receptors for
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-G and HLA-C antigens, that are present
on fetal trophoblast cells [5,10].
Among the proposed mechanisms involved in feto-maternal tolerance are depletion of alloreactive leukocytes and lymphocytes, changes
in cell abundances, high levels of leukaemia inhibitory factor, transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, haem
oxygenase isoform 1 (HO-1), up-regulation of HLA-G on trophoblast
cells, increased apoptosis of activated maternal lymphocytes and reduced complement activity [2,6,11–16].

infertility [7]. Much research has been performed to understand the
mechanisms at the feto-maternal interface during implantation and
during the ﬁrst trimester. In contrast, the current knowledge of the
conditions and immune mechanisms in the endometrium before implantation is not only sparse, but also controversial.
The aim of this review is to evaluate studies reported so far regarding the immune cell subpopulations of natural killer (NK) cells and
of regulatory T cells (Tregs), and their possible interplay, in relation to
infertility. Our main focus is conditions and mechanisms in the periimplantation endometrium. Based on existing research already published, hypotheses are: 1) women suﬀering from infertility have lower
amounts of endometrial NK cells, characterized by CD56 and CD16,
compared with fertile controls; 2) the number of endometrial Tregs,
characterized by FoxP3, is reduced in women with infertility compared
with fertile controls.

3.1. Th1/Th2 balance
In order to identify the complex network behind the feto-protective
mechanisms, several studies have also focused on cytokine secretion
and the Th1/Th2 balance in maintenance of pregnancy. Helper T cells
are classiﬁed as Th1 or Th2 according to their cytokine secretion proﬁle. Th1 cells produce especially IL-2, INF-γ, and TNF-α. In contrast,
Th2 cells produce IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10. Successful pregnancy appears to
be characterized by a Th2-dominated response [17,18]. With the onset
of pregnancy, the local endometrial immune system seems to switch to
an immunity dominated by a Th2 environment. This switch is believed
to reduce uNK cell cytotoxicity, but also uNK cells have been reported
to facilitate the Th2 immune environment [19]. This might explain one
of the mechanisms behind certain reproductive pathologies such as
unexplained infertility. Therefore, reasonably, it can be speculated that
imbalances in numbers and activity of maternal leukocytes disturb the
Th1/Th2 balance by an abnormal cytokine secretion, and promoting a
Th1 response instead. A proinﬂammatory Th1 cytokine response has
been associated with lysis of trophoblast cells, and a Th1 shift has been
observed in women with unexplained infertility compared to fertile
women [17,20,21]. Contrary, an association between excessive Th2
immunity and infertility has been reported [22,23]. However, the
concept of Th1/Th2 balance is probably too simplistic, because the two
subpopulations have been shown to secrete some common cytokines,
and other distinct subpopulations of T helper cells have been deﬁned
[2]. Therefore, to explain how tolerance by the maternal immune
system is regulated, the Th1/Th2 balance equilibrium is not suﬃcient
as one single explanation and functions as part of a more complex interaction and cooperating immunological network.

2. Methods
This review provides an overview of current knowledge on the expression of immune cells as above mentioned. The relevant literature
was obtained using the Pubmed database. Both regular advanced free
text search and the MeSH search function were used. MeSH terms as
‘pregnancy’, ‘leukocytes/immunology’, infertility/pathology, ‘pregnancy complications’, ‘endometrium/pathology’, ‘biopsy’, ‘natural
killer cells’, ‘antigens CD56/analysis’, ‘antigens CD16/analysis’, ‘regulatory T cells’, and ‘FoxP3’ were used in diﬀerent combinations.
Regarding the search for original studies, main focus was on quantitative measurements of immune cells present in the endometrium. The
search was limited to studies investigating the association between
expression of CD56, CD16, and FoxP3 in endometrial tissue around the
time of implantation and in cases of infertility. According to the method
of measuring, CD56 expression may both be referred to as CD56+ or
CD56-, as well as CD56bright or CD56dim. As a general rule, CD56bright
may be considered as CD56+ [8]. Many of the identiﬁed studies measured other markers than the above-mentioned but these results were
not included. The methods of measuring the expression of especially
CD16 and CD56 included immunohistochemistry and ﬂow cytometry.
Regarding terminology, studies using both ‘endometrial NK cells’ and
‘uterine NK cells’ were included. The identiﬁed relevant publications
were all written in English. Additionally, reference lists of the identiﬁed
studies were examined for possible relevant studies not included in the
initial search.
The majority of research published so far has measurements of
CD16 and CD56 of interest. Only a few original articles focusing on
FoxP3 in pre-implantation endometrium were identiﬁed, and the
methods used were diverse. One study using immunohistochemistry
focused on infertility caused by endometriosis, an exception compared
to the other studies.

4. Common mechanisms for infertility and recurrent miscarriages
in reproductive immunopathology
Human endometrial stroma contains endometrial leukocytes as
earlier described, and these cells have been associated with reproductive immunopathology such as infertility and recurrent miscarriages (RM) [9]. The majority of current research has had recurrent
miscarriage as the focus of interest. However, some studies investigated
women with a history of infertility, where some have not necessarily
experienced recurrent miscarriage. It has been suggested, that the implantation-related immune abnormality observed for RM patients also
exists in infertile patients, and that at least some of these reproductive
pathologies may be due to a common underlying mechanism as those in
recurrent miscarriages [24–26].

3. The pregnant woman’s immune response to the semi-allogenic
fetus
To avoid an aggressive response from the maternal immune system
towards the fetus, the maternal immune cells in close contact with fetal
tissue may possess functions diﬀerent from that of peripheral immune
cells. A criterion for successful implantation and placentation is trophoblast invasion of the uterine lining. This invasion process has to be
well regulated to avoid pregnancy complications and undesirable
pregnancy outcomes. Research supports that maternal leukocytes and
lymphocytes including T cells, B cells, NK cells, monocytes, and macrophages along with cytokine signalling and growth factor levels play
important roles in this process [5,9].
Around the time of implantation, the endometrium is populated by
an abundance of maternal leukocytes. The maternal leukocytes may
participate in a mechanism for maintenance of pregnancy by protecting
the fetus from maternal immunologic rejection. Furthermore, some of

5. CD56+CD16− uterine NK cells – phenotype and function
Natural killer cells are generally known as a minor cell fraction in
circulating blood and peripheral organs functioning in innate immune
responses. The majority of human NK cells are characterized as
CD56dim and are eﬀective killers and mediators of cytotoxicity [4].
However, NK cells play important roles in the female reproductive
system too. They inﬁltrate at diﬀerent anatomic sites such as the uterine
mucosa and the decidual tissue, beyond and during pregnancy. During
694

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Human Immunology 79 (2018) 693–701

L. Kofod et al.

pregnancy, especially in the ﬁrst trimester, decidual NK cells (dNK
cells) constitute the cellular majority, > 70%, among leukocytes in the
placenta [27]. The uNK cell population has shown to persist throughout
normal pregnancies until term, which emphasizes the importance not
only initially, but also for maintaining pregnancy [28].
Uterine NK cells are adjacent to trophoblast cells, and thereby
considered as one of the important players behind maternal acceptance
of the fetus. Decidual NK cells have generally reduced cytotoxicity,
promote vascular formation of spiral arteries and allow trophoblast
invasion through various cytokine secretion, including macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and granulocyte macrophage-colony
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) [29]. Additionally, the secretion of
growth-promoting factors from NK cells has shown to be essential for
fetal growth [30].

receptors (NCRs) known to be expressed in peripheral blood NK cells
[27,42]. Some of the KIRs are receptors for HLA-G, and especially HLAC; both are surface antigens on trophoblast cells as outlined above. A
decline in the frequency of KIRs speciﬁc for HLA-C expressed by uNK
cells has been observed among women suﬀering from recurrent miscarriage [43]. The same picture might emerge for infertile women.
However, it illustrates the potential importance of uNK cells in regulation of trophoblast invasion.
The presence of uNK cells seem to coincide with the diﬀerent phases
of the ovarian hormone cycle [44]. One study demonstrated CD56+
uNK cell proliferation from day 22 (secretory phase) of a standardized
28-day cycle, with a pre-menstrual maximum, and shedding with the
onset of menstruation [31,45]. Whether this mid-secretory rise of uNK
cells origins from a recruitment of peripheral NK cells or represents in
utero proliferation has not been clariﬁed [42]. Some evidence has
shown a lack of expression of chemokine receptors such as CXCR3 and
CXCR4 indicating that uNK cells do not migrate to the endometrium
from other tissues or from the blood, but rather originate from local
hematopoietic progenitor cells [33,46]. Other studies have suggested
progesterone and estradiol levels to mediate the ﬂuctuations in uNK cell
numbers during the cycle [47,48].
If pregnancy occurs, the number of uNK cells increases further,
especially in the decidua during the ﬁrst trimester. Thereafter, the
number gradually declines. The abundance at the time of implantation
and in early pregnancy suggests that the subset may be important for a
successful establishment of pregnancy. The role of uNK cells during
pregnancy is still unknown. However, they may carry a pivotal role in
angiogenesis as in early pregnancy maintaining the expanding placenta.
The role of uNK cells in the ﬁeld of infertility is not yet fully understood, but a dysregulation in the pre-implantation endometrium has
been associated with infertility (Table 1).

5.1. CD56+CD16- uterine NK cells
Natural killer cells are to be found in the non-pregnant endometrial
tissue as uNK cells. Here, they constitute over 30% of the total leukocyte population, in contrast to the fraction in peripheral blood, which is
only 5–15%; and during pregnancy decidual NK cells comprise 70–80%
of the decidual lymphocytes [27,31]. The majority of NK cells in peripheral blood are CD56+CD16+. Increased density of the surface antigen CD56 and decreased CD16 expression make CD56+CD16−
uterine and decidual NK cells phenotypically distinct from that of
peripheral NK cells [32,33]. It is interesting that the uNK cells downregulate CD16 expression; CD16 has shown to trigger NK cell antibodydependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). A study on peripheral
blood NK cells has demonstrated higher cytolytic activity towards NK
cell targets among CD16+ NK cells than CD16- NK cells [34]. An increased amount of CD16+ uNK cells in infertile women is also associated with deﬁciency of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
normally necessary for vascular formation in the placenta [35]. Consequently, the “normal” lack of CD16 surface expression on uNK cells
may be considered as a pro-fertile mediator, and make uNK cells more
regulatory than cytotoxic. If the phenotype and function of uterine and
endometrial NK cells is to be evaluated, it should primarily be made
using sample material from the uterus and not by a peripheral blood
sample.

5.3. Uterine NK cell counts in relation to infertility
The studies listed in Table 1 show controversial results. In a recent
study, we observed a decrease in the number of CD56+ uNK cells in
infertile women compared to normal fertile women [49], equal to the
observations reported by Klentzeris et al. Conversely, two studies did
not ﬁnd any diﬀerences in CD56 [24,25]. As we did not co-stain in our
study, the evaluation of CD56 and CD16 expression together was limited. Using ﬂow cytometry, Fukui et al. found a decreased amount of
CD56brightCD16− uNK cells in infertile women, who had a spontaneous
miscarriage in the following IVF cycle, in some accordance with our
result. Additionally, Giuliani et al. observed a higher percentage of
CD16+ uNK cells in the infertility group compared to fertile women.
This support the tendency, we have reported [49].
Given the fact that the uNK cell number rapidly increases in midsecretory phase from day 22 of a standardised 28-day cycle, the biopsy
collection day may be a confounding variable [45]. The confounding
eﬀect may be more apparent in studies with biopsies taken during an
interval instead of at one well-deﬁned day in the cycle.
Furthermore, it has been suggested that the signiﬁcantly lower
number of CD56+ uNK cells among controls, who have previously
given birth, could be an eﬀect of this previous birth, as pregnancy and
birth involves extensive changes in size and vascularization of the
uterus. In addition, some investigators describe an altered composition
of endometrial leukocyte subsets in women with reproductive problems, representing a relative diﬀerence instead of absolute. It looks
like these women tend to express a higher density of CD16 and lesser
CD56, the CD56dimCD16+ phenotype, compared to controls [26].
Regarding the prognostic value of measuring uNK cells, interpreting
the results of Fukui et al., it looks like high density of CD56dimCD16+ is
unfavourable, when it comes to maintenance of pregnancy (abortion
versus delivered group) among infertile women (Fukui et al., 1999).
Further support for this is the ﬁnding in our own study observing a high
percentage of CD56+ uNK cells being correlated with a high chance of

5.2. Functions
The functions of uNK cells are thought to be dependent on unique
cell activation, distinguishing them from other NK cells [36]. Several
studies have identiﬁed interleukin 15 (IL-15) as an important inducer of
uNK cell proliferation and function [37]. By speciﬁc unfavourable cytokine stimulation, these CD56+CD16- cells have also been found to
enhance the release of INF-γ promoting a Th1 response, which might
result in an attack on trophoblast cells and maybe pregnancy loss [38].
Therefore, the speciﬁc inducer of activation and the activation process
per se might be crucial for the subsequent eﬀector functions.
The subset of uNK cells is capable of secreting a wide array of
chemokines and cytokines such as leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and
angiogenic growth factor not normally produced by peripheral NK cells.
As mentioned earlier, this might be important for decidualization and
formation of spiral arteries, which is important in early pregnancy establishment [30]. It has been shown that women with unexplained
infertility has a reduced expression of LIF [39].
Additionally, uNK cells may be important in controlling the trophoblast invasion [40]. The cytotoxicity of uNK cells is already downregulated before implantation, and therefore uNK cells may be considered a beneﬁcial version of NK cells in relation to fertility and
pregnancy [41].
Uterine NK cells have a unique receptor repertoire, expressing
killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs) and immunoglobulinlike transcript-2 (ILT2), and lack NKp30, one of the natural cytotoxicity
695

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Human Immunology 79 (2018) 693–701

achieving pregnancy [49]. Two other studies have failed to predict
pregnancy outcome based on CD56 and CD16 expression, a conclusion
supported by a meta-analysis by Tang et al. [42].
Due to Table 1, both the absolute count and the percentage of uNK
cell markers seem to be important for normal fertility and obtaining
pregnancy. In normal endometrium, both the absolute count and the
percentage of CD56+ uNK cells have shown to rise dramatically from
day 22 in cycle [45]. Whether the absolute count or the percentage is
most important in maintaining – and thereby in diagnostic screening of
– normal fertility, is yet unknown.
Most of the studies in Table 1 indicate that the status of uNK cells
may inﬂuence the ability to reproduce. However, to determine whether
the abnormality of leukocyte subpopulations is the cause or the result of
abnormal pregnancies can be very diﬃcult. Especially because an imbalance in leukocyte expression also might be due to a post-miscarriage
inﬂammatory response, challenging studies that investigate women
with infertility.
In mice, restraint stress has shown to decrease the density of uNK
cells up to almost 50% and alter the composition of T lymphocytes [50].
In humans, peripheral NK cell numbers and activity has shown to
ﬂuctuate under inﬂuence of several factors, such as progesterone and
estradiol levels, exercise, time of day, and sympathetic response to
stressors [47,51]. These are all potential confounders, important to be
aware of.
The studies use diﬀerent methods of analysis; some employing ﬂow
cytometry, others immunohistochemistry. Analyses based on ﬂow cytometry may not be an accurate estimation of the factual in vivo counts
because of the procedure of tissue digestion in the preparation process.
On the other hand, assessing staining results of immunohistochemistry
might be biased by intra- and interobserver variability. The diﬀerent
methods of analysis and the variation in study populations inﬂuence the
comparability. Also, a lack of consensus concerning counting of immune cells in endometrial biopsies exists, and relevant reference ranges
for the respective immune cell counts need to be established. A recent
study has established such a protocol for immunohistochemical analysis, especially highlighting the importance of equal timing of the
endometrial biopsy and suggesting how to select the most appropriate
ﬁelds for counting [31,45]. The protocol recommends to count only
cells with an identiﬁed nuclei, to exclude perivascular and periglandular aggregates and to count ﬁve ﬁelds with ×40 objective. For
future research, this approach may be very useful.
Characteristic for the studies discussed above is their relatively
small sample size. By increasing the study population, the probability of
detecting a possible diﬀerence might increase as well. Despite the lack
of consensus in current clinical evidence, there is a biological plausibility for a role for uNK cells in infertility. Uterine NK cells are most
numerous in the implantation window and in early pregnancy, and not
at least, they are adjacent to and interact with extravillous trophoblast
cells making them an important player in feto-maternal tolerance.

The group who implanted also included the abortion group and this may explain the unexpected result.

6. FoxP3+ regulatory T cells
The T cell population in the endometrium consists of diﬀerent
subsets, including regulatory CD4+CD25+ T cells (Tregs) [52]. The
Treg subset develops in the thymus and peripheral tissue, and functions
by e.g. secreting immunosuppressive cytokines to prevent the immune
system from reacting against auto-antigens. Besides avoiding destructive autoimmunity, Tregs are also involved in graft tolerance [53].
6.1. Generation of FoxP3+ regulatory T cells
In order to diﬀerentiate from naive CD4+ T cell precursors, TGF-β is
the key cytokine driving this process. In the presence of TGF-β, T cells
diﬀerentiate into a regulatory T cell phenotype expressing FoxP3 [52].
In continuation, IL-2 and IL-15 have also been shown to stimulate
FoxP3 expression in Tregs [54]. FoxP3 was ﬁrst identiﬁed in relation to

a

LH surge + 7 days
Kofod et al.
[49]

41 infertile women
20 control women

Immunohistochemistry

CD56, CD16

Association between uNK
and infertility and
subsequent IVF outcome

The percentage of CD16+ cells was signiﬁcantly higher in
infertile women compared to fertile controls. No signiﬁcant
diﬀerences were found in the expression of CD56
Infertile women had signiﬁcantly decreased numbers of
CD56+ cells compared to fertile controls
Increased number and percentage of CD56+ uNK cells served
as predictors for achieving pregnancy. Trend towards
decreased numbers of CD16+ cells in women who became
pregnant compared to those, who did not
Association between uNK
and infertility
CD56, CD16
LH surge + 7–10 days
Giuliani et al.
[24]

Immunohistochemistry

CD56, CD16
Day 22–26 assessed by hormone
levels
Flow cytrometry
Matteo et al.
[25]

10 infertile women
25 control women from the study
by Flynn et al. [100]
30 infertile
10 control women

CD56, CD16

Association between uNK
and infertility

Infertile women had signiﬁcantly decreased numbers of
CD56+ cells compared to fertile controls
The abortion group had signiﬁcantly decreased percentage of
the CD56brightCD16- NK cell subset and an increased
percentage of the CD56dimCD16+ NK cell subset compared to
those who delivered
The percentage of CD56dimCD16+ was signiﬁcantly higher in
the group who implanted successfully, compared to those
women who failed to implanta
No diﬀerences were found between infertile women
compared to fertile controls
Association between uNK
and infertility
Association between uNK
and infertility, and
subsequent IVF outcome
LH surge + 4, +7, +10 and +13
days
5–10 days after the initial rise of
basal body temperature and
conﬁrmed by histologic examination
Immunohistochemistry and
morphometric
Flow cytrometry
24 infertile
24 control women
76 infertile women of whom 25
obtained a pregnancy (18 women
delivered and 7 aborted)
Klentzeris et al.
[99]
Fukui et al. [26]

CD56

Sample day (in menstrual cycle)
Method of analysis
N
Study

Table 1
Studies investigating expression of uNK cells in endometrial tissue related to infertility.

Variables

Purpose of study

Results

L. Kofod et al.

696

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Human Immunology 79 (2018) 693–701

L. Kofod et al.

6.4. Tregs in reproductive immunopathology

the X-linked disease, the IPEX syndrome (Immune dysregulation,
Polyendocrinopathy, Enteropathy, X-linked), where FoxP3 is mutated.
IPEX is a severe systemic autoimmune disease [52]. This helped investigators to deﬁne FoxP3 as a ‘fate-determining’ transcription factor,
and a speciﬁc marker for Tregs, a unique phenotype of T cells with
immunosuppressive properties [52]. Therefore, measuring the expression of FoxP3 may evaluate the diﬀerentiation capability, but can also
be used as a surrogate measure of the relative abundance of Tregs in
diﬀerent tissues [55].

Several studies have reported an association between Tregs and
reproductive pathologies in diﬀerent biological contexts including
peripheral and local Tregs. In this review, local Tregs are deﬁned as
located in the endometrium and decidua.
6.4.1. Peripheral Tregs
An increase in Tregs in peripheral blood is observed prior to embryo
implantation and in decidual tissue of normal early pregnancy [52].
Arruvito et al. have examined FoxP3+ Tregs in peripheral blood in
women experiencing recurrent miscarriages, and observed a reduced
number of CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ Tregs compared with fertile controls
[65].

6.2. Proliferation and diﬀerentiation of Tregs in relation to pregnancy
Tregs are essential for successful pregnancy, protecting the semiallogenic fetus from immune rejection [56]. Interestingly, tumor grafts
expressing paternal antigens have shown to be rejected after normal
delivery, suggesting that the immunosuppressive mechanism led by
Tregs is transient, limited to the period of pregnancy [57]. To elicit
activation and diﬀerentiation of Tregs before pregnancy and at the time
of conception, seminal ﬂuid from the male partner may be important
[58]. Seminal ﬂuid contains many of the same paternal antigens later
expressed by the fetus. Therefore, a possible role for seminal ﬂuid in
driving Treg activation and proliferation is interesting, because it may
stimulate initial priming of Tregs and promote tolerance to paternal
alloantigens prior to embryo implantation [59]. Seminal ﬂuid may be
considered a key regulator of the uterine Treg abundance. In addition,
HLA-G expressed by trophoblast cells is also a possible regulator of Treg
proliferation [52]. One study reported that soluble HLA-G (HLA-G5),
secreted
by
human
mesenchymal
stem
cells,
induced
CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ regulatory T cells [60]. The observations suggest
a local as well as a peripheral inducer of Treg proliferation and differentiation in relation to pregnancy.

6.4.2. Local Tregs counts
In line with the observations mentioned above, a decreased proportion of Tregs has been demonstrated in decidual tissue of women
with spontaneous abortion compared with cases of elective abortions
[66,67]. Other investigators comparing women with recurrent miscarriage with fertile controls conﬁrmed the signiﬁcantly decreased expression of CD4+CD25+ Tregs in the decidua [68].
Also, the function of these cells showed to be deﬁcient in women
with recurrent miscarriages. Data showed a correlation between
FoxP3+ Treg counts and the menstrual cycle, showing a Treg expansion
in late follicular phase [65].
6.5. Experiments in mice
Previous experiments in mice have shown an expansion of Tregs
around the time of implantation, and a depletion of Tregs terminates
pregnancy [69]. Another study demonstrated that transferring exogenous Tregs in the peri-implantation period in depleted mice resulted
in protection from fetal loss [11]. Transferring Tregs after 4–5 days of
pregnancy was unsuccessful, suggesting that Tregs play an important
role in the time just around implantation. Studies by Shima et al. support the immunosuppressive role of Tregs in the pregnancy peri-implantation phase, and also in early pregnancy, with data from mouse
experiments [70]. Depletion of Tregs in late pregnancy did not terminate pregnancy, nor induce abnormal pregnancy outcome, such as intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR), hypertension or proteinuria;
thereby supporting the role of Tregs around implantation and in early
pregnancy.

6.3. Functions of Tregs
Compared to peripheral Tregs, the Tregs localized in the decidua
have shown to display a more frequent expression of FoxP3 in normal
pregnancy enhancing a suppressive phenotype [61]. The subset is less
frequent compared to decidual NK cells in ﬁrst trimester tissue, but not
less important [62]. An increase is seen throughout the pregnancy and a
decrease in the late puerperium [6,12].
One of the main functions of Tregs is to regulate allo-reactive Th1
cell subsets mentioned earlier [6,13]. Secondly, Tregs have been shown
to increase placental HO-1, leading to up-regulation of IL-10, TGF-β and
cytotoxic T-lymphocyt antigen-4 (CTLA-4), which all in diﬀerent ways
suppress immune responses facilitating a protective microenvironment
in the uterus [6,63,64]. Tregs may directly block maternal eﬀector T
cells, either by expression of CTLA-4 or by direct cell-to-cell contact,
preventing a harmful immunologic reaction towards paternal antigens.

6.6. Endometrial FoxP3 expression in relation to infertility
To date, very few human studies of FoxP3 expression in peri-implantation endometrium have been reported using diﬀerent methods

Table 2
Studies investigating expression of regulatory T cells (Tregs) in endometrial tissue related to infertility.
Study

N

Method of analysis

Sample day (in menstrual
cycle)

Variables

Purpose of study

Results

Jasper
et al.
[55]

10 infertile women
12 control women

RT-PCR

FoxP3

Association between
Tregs and infertility

Chen et al.
[71]

7 infertile women
with mild
endometriosis (EM)
20 infertile women
with advanced EM
20 control women
41 infertile women
20 control women

Immunohistochemistry and
RT-PCR

5–9 days after ovulation,
timed according to the last
menstrual period along with
histological dating
Day 19–23 of menstrual
cycle, based on last
menstrual period along with
histological dating

FoxP3

Association between
Tregs and infertility
caused by
endometriosis

FoxP3

Association between
Tregs and infertility

Infertile women have signiﬁcantly
reduced endometrial expression of
FoxP3 mRNA compared to fertile
controls
Immunohistochemistry:
No signiﬁcant diﬀerence
RT-PCR:
Signiﬁcantly higher FoxP3 mRNA
expression in infertile patients
compared to the control group
No signiﬁcant diﬀerences

Kofod
et al.
[49]

Immunohistochemistry

LH surge + 7 days

697

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Human Immunology 79 (2018) 693–701

L. Kofod et al.

of NK cells has been observed (Fig. 1) [83].
Whether the primary role of dNK cells in vivo is cytotoxicity and/or
cytokine-secretion has been diﬃcult to evaluate. However, a study by
Chen et al. showed considerable NK cell cytotoxicity towards HLA-G
knockdown cells compared to the non-knockdowned cells, demonstrating the importance of HLA-G interactions with the receptors ILT2,
ILT4 and KIR2DL4 [84]. In addition, van der Meer et al. reported that
HLA-G stimulation induced dNK cell proliferation [78]. This illustrates
another essential pro-fertile function of the dNK cell/HLA-G interaction.
The uterine mucosa also contains Tregs, and the local abundance
has been suggested to be inﬂuenced by dNK cells. Upon dNK cell activation, IFN-γ and galectin-1 is secreted [5]. This secretion induces
monocyte-derived indoleamine-pyrrole 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) expression and tolerogenic dendritic cell up-regulation, which promote generation of Tregs, thereby enhancing fetal survival [85]. Experimental
studies in mice have reported that uNK cell-deﬁcient mice secrete lower
amounts of IFN-γ, resulting in increased incidence of fetal loss because
of intrauterine fetal growth restriction, aberrant placental vascularity
and hypocellular decidua. This exempliﬁes an essential role of uNK cells
in normal pregnancy and thereby a possible quantitative importance of
IFN-γ [86]. Furthermore, the absence or reduced expression of decidual
galectin-1 has been associated with spontaneous fetal loss in mice,
probably due to low numbers of Tregs [87].
A newly published study observed an interaction of EVT with CD4+
T cells. A co-culture of EVT and CD4+ T cells resulted in increased
numbers of FoxP3+ Tregs, and increased the relative expression level of
FoxP3 in these cells [88]. Although the mechanisms responsible remain
unknown, it might be plausible that HLA-G expressed on EVT could be
involved (Fig. 1). However, we were not able to demonstrate the involvement of HLA-G in changes in Tregs using RNA-interference to
downregulate HLA-G on the choriocarcinoma cell line JEG-3 derived
from trophoblast [89].
Soluble HLA-G (sHLA-G) has been shown to interfere with especially
the killing function of dNK cell at the feto-maternal interface and may,
therefore, be a critical modulator of immunological tolerance during
pregnancy [90,91]. Studies have reported that circulating sHLA-G, either transported from the serum or locally synthesized, is capable of
eliminating both maternal T lymphocytes and dNK cells programmed to
kill HLA-G+ fetal cells by inducing the killer cells to undergo apoptosis
[92–94]. However, the basis for the interaction is not yet clariﬁed.

assessing the FoxP3 expression (Table 2). In general, few patients were
included in these few studies.
Jasper et al. used RT-PCR to quantify possible diﬀerences in FoxP3
mRNA expression, and found signiﬁcantly reduced FoxP3 mRNA in
endometrial tissue of infertile women compared with fertile controls
[55]. These results are in conﬂict with the ﬁndings in the study by Chen
et al. [71]. Chen et al. observed a marginally higher number of FoxP3+
cells in the endometrium of infertile women assessed by immunohistochemistry, not statistically signiﬁcant though [71]. They
supplemented with RT-PCR analyses, revealing a signiﬁcantly higher
FoxP3 mRNA expression in infertile patients than in the control group.
However, the studies were based on infertility with a known cause:
endometriosis. It can be considered that other mechanisms are important in relation to endometriosis compared to unexplained infertility, leading to the contrary results. Investigating the presence of
FoxP3+ cells by immunohistochemistry, we have recently failed to
detect any signiﬁcant diﬀerences between infertile and normal fertile
women in the numbers per area [49]. Generally, studies agree that
numerically fewer Tregs may result in reduced immunosuppressive
capability, in the end possibly causing infertility or miscarriage.
The exact way of immunosuppression carried out by Tregs is not yet
fully deﬁned. A systematic review by Guerin et al. conﬁrms Tregs as
important, and not at least potent immunosuppressors in pregnancy,
and that a Treg numerical and functional deﬁciency is associated with
reproductive problems [52]. Future research may help to acquire
knowledge of the antigens, cytokines and hormones regulating these
cells. This knowledge may be the groundwork for developing therapeutic options for treating reproductive pathologies. However, it
seems reasonable to boost the number or activity of Tregs targeting
conceptual antigens, which, in theory, will improve maternal immune
tolerance in women suﬀering from infertility or recurrent miscarriages.
With regard to the current knowledge of Tregs enrichment at the fetomaternal interface, it still appears plausible that the suppressive actions
of Tregs are also exerted prior to embryo implantation.
To further deﬁne the role of human FoxP3+ Tregs, it will be relevant to examine the expression in peri-implantation endometrial
tissue among women with infertility and compare them to fertile controls.
7. Interactions of dNK cells, Tregs and trophoblast – and a role for
HLA-G

8. Immunomodulatory treatment for infertile women

Understanding the complex mechanisms by which immune cell
subsets interact at the feto-maternal interface during implantation is
very important. The inability of extravillous trophoblast (EVT) to invade the uterine lining may be considered as one of the primary defects
in women with reproductive dysfunctions including infertility. One
mechanism is regulated by interaction between dNK cells and EVT
(Fig. 1). Supported by several studies, one of the key players regarding
this interaction appears to be HLA-G expressed on EVT [72–74]. The
speciﬁc interaction between KIR2DL4 and HLA-G has been a focus of
interest; the KIR2DL4 receptor is markedly present in the decidua [75].
Generally, KIRs are highly polymorphic, but a limited repertoire along
with a lack of inhibitory KIRs speciﬁc for fetal HLA-C, and KIR2DL4
speciﬁc for HLA-G antigens, have been reported in dNK cells from
women experiencing recurrent miscarriages [72,76]. Together, this
might lower the threshold for uNK cell activation and cytotoxicity,
probably contributing to the pathogenesis of infertility. In line with
this, HLA-G has been shown to trigger secretion of pro-angiogenic
factors as VEGF from dNK cells in vitro via KIR2DL4 (Fig. 1) [77,78].
Human leucocyte antigen-G has been shown with high aﬃnity to bind
to the receptors ILT2 and ILT4 [79]. In vitro studies have shown that the
eﬀect of binding is prevention of lysis carried out by dNK cells accompanied by impairment of IFN-γ release [80,81]. The ILT4 receptor is
expressed on monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells [82]. As a
result of the interaction between HLA-G and ILT4, decreased activation

To facilitate the implantation process in women suﬀering from infertility, several studies have investigated the eﬃcacy of immunosuppressant drugs such as glucocorticoids, intravenous immunoglobulin and TNF-α blockers without any promising result [95].
The results are conﬂicting.
A systematic review and meta-analysis by Li et al. found a signiﬁcantly higher implantation rate, clinical pregnancy rate and live
birth rate compared to placebo in women with unexplained infertility
or repeated IVF/ICSI failure receiving intravenous immunoglobulin
[96].
Other biologic therapy options have recently been described as a
new alternative way to manage reproductive pathological conditions.
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) has shown to inﬂuence
Tregs generation and selection via dendritic cell maturation.
Unfortunately, administration of G-CSF has failed to improve implantations rates, clinical pregnancy rates, ongoing pregnancy rates and
miscarriage rates in infertile women in randomized controlled clinical
trials [97,98].
In general, the majority of studies within this ﬁeld investigate RM
and recurrent implantation failure (RIF). To our knowledge, tacrolimus,
cyclosporine and intralipid treatment has only been investigated in
women with RM.
698

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Human Immunology 79 (2018) 693–701

L. Kofod et al.

Fig. 1. Key interactions at the feto-maternal interface between dNK cells, T cells, dendritic cells and HLA-G involved in maternal immune tolerance towards the semiallogenic fetus. The extravillous trophoblast (EVT) is one of the trophoblast subpopulations known to express HLA-G. *ILT4 is expressed on dendritic cells, monocytes
and macrophages. See text for details.

of leukocytes, atypical cytokine secretion, and changes in receptor expression and function, perceiving reproductive pathologies as multifactorial.

In conclusion, the value of immunotherapy as a treatment for infertility is still not clear. Although some evidence exists, we still need
strong evidence to support or refute the role of immuno-modulatory
treatment in cases of infertility.

Acknowledgement
9. Conclusion

This work was supported by the Region Zealand’s Health Sciences
Research Foundation, Denmark.

For decades, several studies have tried to correlate reproductive
pathologies including infertility with an immunological origin. Immune
cell density as well as receptor expression and functioning in endometrial tissue have been general focuses of interest.
Several studies report imbalances in the uNK cell proﬁle among
women with a history of infertility, while other studies are inconclusive. Therefore, some degree of controversy still exists. If a strong
association can be evidenced regarding immune cell imbalances in
endometrial tissue of infertile women, there might be an option for
developing treatments based upon immunotherapy.
Future research may strive to use a standardised protocol for the
assessment of immune cells in endometrial tissue of larger cohorts
compared to current studies. Internationally accepted reference ranges
need to be established promoting inter-study comparability and for the
purpose of deﬁning what is a normal and an abnormal count of uNK
cells.
Regulatory T cells are reported to increase due to pregnancy, and
might function to suppress immune responses to paternal alloantigens.
This immunosuppressing mechanism is thought only to be active during
pregnancy, especially around the time of implantation and in early
pregnancy [70]. Among women suﬀering from infertility a reduced
number of Tregs has been demonstrated, while studies on FoxP3 are
contrary.
Women with reproductive problems are a heterogenic group, which
is an important fact to take into account for studies within the ﬁeld of
reproductive immunology. Furthermore, when focusing on reproductive immunology, one single pathological mechanism may not
necessarily be a suﬃcient explanation, and only in a subgroup is immunological dysfunction probably involved. Perhaps further investigations should search for an impaired interaction between several
immunological mechanisms involving both changes in the distribution

References
[1] J.B. Stanford, What is the true prevalence of infertility? Fertil. Steril. 99 (2013)
1201.
[2] M. Dahl, T.V. Hviid, Human leucocyte antigen class Ib molecules in pregnancy
success and early pregnancy loss, Hum. Reprod. Update 18 (2012) 92.
[3] T.A. Gelbaya, N. Potdar, Y.B. Jeve, L.G. Nardo, Deﬁnition and epidemiology of
unexplained infertility, Obstet. Gynecol. Surv. 69 (2014) 109.
[4] J. Kwak-Kim, A. Gilman-Sachs, Clinical implication of natural killer cells and reproduction, Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 59 (2008) 388.
[5] P.C. Arck, K. Hecher, Fetomaternal immune cross-talk and its consequences for
maternal and oﬀspring's health, Nat. Med. 19 (2013) 548.
[6] J. Alijotas-Reig, E. Llurba, J.M. Gris, Potentiating maternal immune tolerance in
pregnancy: a new challenging role for regulatory T cells, Placenta 35 (2014) 241.
[7] S.K. Lee, C.J. Kim, D.J. Kim, J.H. Kang, Immune cells in the female reproductive
tract, Immune Netw. 15 (2015) 16.
[8] E. Tuckerman, S.M. Laird, A. Prakash, T.C. Li, Prognostic value of the measurement
of uterine natural killer cells in the endometrium of women with recurrent miscarriage, Hum. Reprod. 22 (2007) 2208.
[9] S. Quenby, M. Bates, T. Doig, J. Brewster, D.I. Lewis-Jones, P.M. Johnson, et al.,
Pre-implantation endometrial leukocytes in women with recurrent miscarriage,
Hum. Reprod. 14 (1999) 2386.
[10] A. King, T.D. Burrows, S.E. Hiby, J.M. Bowen, S. Joseph, S. Verma, et al., Surface
expression of HLA-C antigen by human extravillous trophoblast, Placenta 21 (2000)
376.
[11] A.C. Zenclussen, K. Gerlof, M.L. Zenclussen, A. Sollwedel, A.Z. Bertoja, T. Ritter,
et al., Abnormal T-cell reactivity against paternal antigens in spontaneous abortion:
adoptive transfer of pregnancy-induced CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cells prevents
fetal rejection in a murine abortion model, Am. J. Pathol. 166 (2005) 811.
[12] D.A. Somerset, Y. Zheng, M.D. Kilby, D.M. Sansom, M.T. Drayson, Normal human
pregnancy is associated with an elevation in the immune suppressive CD25+
CD4+ regulatory T-cell subset, Immunology 112 (2004) 38.
[13] R. Raghupathy, Th1-type immunity is incompatible with successful pregnancy,
Immunol. Today 18 (1997) 478.
[14] A.C. Zenclussen, R. Joachim, E. Hagen, C. Peiser, B.F. Klapp, P.C. Arck, Heme
oxygenase is downregulated in stress-triggered and interleukin-12-mediated murine
abortion, Scand. J. Immunol. 55 (2002) 560.

699

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Human Immunology 79 (2018) 693–701

L. Kofod et al.

[42] A.W. Tang, Z. Alﬁrevic, S. Quenby, Natural killer cells and pregnancy outcomes in
women with recurrent miscarriage and infertility: a systematic review, Hum.
Reprod. 26 (2011) 1971.
[43] S. Wang, Y.P. Li, B. Ding, Y.R. Zhao, Z.J. Chen, C.Y. Xu, et al., Recurrent miscarriage
is associated with a decline of decidual natural killer cells expressing killer cell
immunoglobulin-like receptors speciﬁc for human leukocyte antigen C, J. Obstet.
Gynaecol. Res. 40 (2014) 1288.
[44] B.A. Croy, M.J. van den Heuvel, A.M. Borzychowski, C. Tayade, Uterine natural
killer cells: a specialized diﬀerentiation regulated by ovarian hormones, Immunol.
Rev. 214 (2006) 161.
[45] P. Russell, G. Sacks, K. Tremellen, A. Gee, The distribution of immune cells and
macrophages in the endometrium of women with recurrent reproductive failure. III:
Further observations and reference ranges, Pathology 45 (2013) 393.
[46] L. Lynch, L. Golden-Mason, M. Eogan, C. O'Herlihy, C. O'Farrelly, Cells with haematopoietic stem cell phenotype in adult human endometrium: relevance to infertility? Hum. Reprod. 22 (2007) 919.
[47] C.L. Sentman, S.K. Meadows, C.R. Wira, M. Eriksson, Recruitment of uterine NK
cells: induction of CXC chemokine ligands 10 and 11 in human endometrium by
estradiol and progesterone, J. Immunol. 173 (2004) 6760.
[48] W. Guo, P. Li, G. Zhao, H. Fan, Y. Hu, Y. Hou, Glucocorticoid receptor mediates the
eﬀect of progesterone on uterine natural killer cells, Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 67
(2012) 463.
[49] L. Kofod, A. Lindhard, M. Bzorek, J.O. Eriksen, L.G. Larsen, Hviid TVF: endometrial
immune markers are potential predictors of normal fertility and pregnancy after in
vitro fertilization, Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 78 (2017), https://doi.org/10.1111/
aji.12684.
[50] G. Liu, Y. Dong, Z. Wang, J. Cao, Y. Chen, Restraint stress alters immune parameters
and induces oxidative stress in the mouse uterus during embryo implantation, Stress
17 (2014) 494.
[51] K. Shakhar, E. Rosenne, R. Loewenthal, G. Shakhar, H. Carp, S. Ben-Eliyahu, High
NK cell activity in recurrent miscarriage: what are we really measuring? Hum.
Reprod. 21 (2006) 2421.
[52] L.R. Guerin, J.R. Prins, S.A. Robertson, Regulatory T-cells and immune tolerance in
pregnancy: a new target for infertility treatment? Hum. Reprod. Update 15 (2009)
517.
[53] S. Sakaguchi, Immunologic tolerance maintained by regulatory T cells: implications
for autoimmunity, tumor immunity and transplantation tolerance, Vox Sang 83
(Suppl. 1) (2002) 151.
[54] L. Arruvito, A.I. Sotelo, A. Billordo, L. Fainboim, A physiological role for inducible
FOXP3(+) Treg cells. Lessons from women with reproductive failure, Clin.
Immunol. 136 (2010) 432.
[55] M.J. Jasper, K.P. Tremellen, S.A. Robertson, Primary unexplained infertility is associated with reduced expression of the T-regulatory cell transcription factor Foxp3
in endometrial tissue, Mol. Hum. Reprod. 12 (2006) 301.
[56] S. Saito, Y. Sasaki, M. Sakai, CD4(+)CD25high regulatory T cells in human pregnancy, J. Reprod. Immunol. 65 (2005) 111.
[57] A. Tafuri, J. Alferink, P. Moller, G.J. Hammerling, B. Arnold, T cell awareness of
paternal alloantigens during pregnancy, Science 270 (1995) 630.
[58] L.R. Guerin, L.M. Moldenhauer, J.R. Prins, J.J. Bromﬁeld, J.D. Hayball,
S.A. Robertson, Seminal ﬂuid regulates accumulation of FOXP3+ regulatory T cells
in the preimplantation mouse uterus through expanding the FOXP3+ cell pool and
CCL19-mediated recruitment, Biol. Reprod. 85 (2011) 397.
[59] S.A. Robertson, L.R. Guerin, J.J. Bromﬁeld, K.M. Branson, A.C. Ahlstrom, A.S. Care,
Seminal ﬂuid drives expansion of the CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cell pool and
induces tolerance to paternal alloantigens in mice, Biol. Reprod. 80 (2009) 1036.
[60] Z. Selmani, A. Naji, I. Zidi, B. Favier, E. Gaiﬀe, L. Obert, et al., Human leukocyte
antigen-G5 secretion by human mesenchymal stem cells is required to suppress T
lymphocyte and natural killer function and to induce CD4+CD25highFOXP3+
regulatory T cells, Stem Cells 26 (2008) 212.
[61] J. Mjosberg, G. Berg, M.C. Jenmalm, J. Ernerudh, FOXP3+ regulatory T cells and T
helper 1, T helper 2, and T helper 17 cells in human early pregnancy decidua, Biol.
Reprod. 82 (2010) 698.
[62] A. Trundley, A. Moﬀett, Human uterine leukocytes and pregnancy, Tissue Antigens
63 (2004) 1.
[63] A.C. Zenclussen, K. Gerlof, M.L. Zenclussen, S. Ritschel, A. Zambon Bertoja, S. Fest,
et al., Regulatory T cells induce a privileged tolerant microenvironment at the fetalmaternal interface, Eur. J. Immunol. 36 (2006) 82.
[64] B.M. Choi, H.O. Pae, Y.R. Jeong, Y.M. Kim, H.T. Chung, Critical role of heme
oxygenase-1 in Foxp3-mediated immune suppression, Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 327 (2005) 1066.
[65] L. Arruvito, M. Sanz, A.H. Banham, L. Fainboim, Expansion of CD4+CD25+and
FOXP3+ regulatory T cells during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle: implications for human reproduction, J. Immunol. 178 (2007) 2572.
[66] Y. Sasaki, M. Sakai, S. Miyazaki, S. Higuma, A. Shiozaki, S. Saito, Decidual and
peripheral blood CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells in early pregnancy subjects and
spontaneous abortion cases, Mol. Hum. Reprod. 10 (2004) 347.
[67] C. Thuere, M.L. Zenclussen, A. Schumacher, S. Langwisch, U. Schulte-Wrede,
A. Teles, et al., Kinetics of regulatory T cells during murine pregnancy, Am. J.
Reprod. Immunol. 58 (2007) 514.
[68] H. Yang, L. Qiu, G. Chen, Z. Ye, C. Lu, Q. Lin, Proportional change of CD4+CD25+
regulatory T cells in decidua and peripheral blood in unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion patients, Fertil. Steril. 89 (2008) 656.
[69] V.R. Aluvihare, M. Kallikourdis, A.G. Betz, Regulatory T cells mediate maternal
tolerance to the fetus, Nat. Immunol. 5 (2004) 266.
[70] T. Shima, Y. Sasaki, M. Itoh, A. Nakashima, N. Ishii, K. Sugamura, et al., Regulatory
T cells are necessary for implantation and maintenance of early pregnancy but not

[15] N. Miwa, S. Hayakawa, S. Miyazaki, S. Myojo, Y. Sasaki, M. Sakai, et al., IDO expression on decidual and peripheral blood dendritic cells and monocytes/macrophages after treatment with CTLA-4 or interferon-gamma increase in normal
pregnancy but decrease in spontaneous abortion, Mol. Hum. Reprod. 11 (2005)
865.
[16] C.L. Stewart, P. Kaspar, L.J. Brunet, H. Bhatt, I. Gadi, F. Kontgen, et al., Blastocyst
implantation depends on maternal expression of leukaemia inhibitory factor,
Nature 359 (1992) 76.
[17] J.A. Hill, K. Polgar, D.J. Anderson, T-helper 1-type immunity to trophoblast in
women with recurrent spontaneous abortion, JAMA 273 (1995) 1933.
[18] T.G. Wegmann, H. Lin, L. Guilbert, T.R. Mosmann, Bidirectional cytokine interactions in the maternal-fetal relationship: is successful pregnancy a TH2 phenomenon? Immunol. Today 14 (1993) 353.
[19] N. Ledee, M. Petitbarat, L. Chevrier, D. Vitoux, K. Vezmar, M. Rahmati, et al., The
uterine immune proﬁle may help women with repeated unexplained embryo implantation failure after in vitro fertilization, Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 75 (2016)
388.
[20] M.P. Piccinni, L. Beloni, C. Livi, E. Maggi, G. Scarselli, S. Romagnani, Defective
production of both leukemia inhibitory factor and type 2 T-helper cytokines by
decidual T cells in unexplained recurrent abortions, Nat. Med. 4 (1998) 1020.
[21] J.R. Wilczynski, P. Radwan, H. Tchorzewski, M. Banasik, Immunotherapy of patients with recurrent spontaneous miscarriage and idiopathic infertility: does the
immunization-dependent Th2 cytokine overbalance really matter? Arch. Immunol.
Ther. Exp. (Warsz) 60 (2012) 151.
[22] M.D. Bates, S. Quenby, K. Takakuwa, P.M. Johnson, G.S. Vince, Aberrant cytokine
production by peripheral blood mononuclear cells in recurrent pregnancy loss?
Hum. Reprod. 17 (2002) 2439.
[23] G. Chaouat, N. Ledee-Bataille, S. Zourbas, S. Ostojic, S. Dubanchet, J. Martal, et al.,
Cytokines, implantation and early abortion: re-examining the Th1/Th2 paradigm
leads to question the single pathway, single therapy concept, Am. J. Reprod.
Immunol. 50 (2003) 177.
[24] E. Giuliani, K.L. Parkin, B.A. Lessey, S.L. Young, A.T. Fazleabas, Characterization of
uterine NK cells in women with infertility or recurrent pregnancy loss and associated endometriosis, Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 72 (2014) 262.
[25] M.G. Matteo, P. Greco, P. Rosenberg, A. Mestice, D. Baldini, T. Falagario, et al.,
Normal percentage of CD56bright natural killer cells in young patients with a
history of repeated unexplained implantation failure after in vitro fertilization cycles, Fertil. Steril. 88 (2007) 990.
[26] A. Fukui, S. Fujii, E. Yamaguchi, H. Kimura, S. Sato, Y. Saito, Natural killer cell
subpopulations and cytotoxicity for infertile patients undergoing in vitro fertilization, Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 41 (1999) 413.
[27] I. Manaster, S. Mizrahi, D. Goldman-Wohl, H.Y. Sela, N. Stern-Ginossar, D. Lankry,
et al., Endometrial NK cells are special immature cells that await pregnancy, J.
Immunol. 181 (2008) 1869.
[28] P.J. Williams, R.F. Searle, S.C. Robson, B.A. Innes, J.N. Bulmer, Decidual leucocyte
populations in early to late gestation normal human pregnancy, J. Reprod.
Immunol. 82 (2009) 24.
[29] J. Hanna, D. Goldman-Wohl, Y. Hamani, I. Avraham, C. Greenﬁeld, S. NatansonYaron, et al., Decidual NK cells regulate key developmental processes at the human
fetal-maternal interface, Nat. Med. 12 (2006) 1065.
[30] B. Fu, Y. Zhou, X. Ni, X. Tong, X. Xu, Z. Dong, et al., Natural killer cells promote
fetal development through the secretion of growth-promoting factors, Immunity 47
(2017) 1100.
[31] P. Russell, L. Anderson, D. Lieberman, K. Tremellen, H. Yilmaz, B. Cheerala, et al.,
The distribution of immune cells and macrophages in the endometrium of women
with recurrent reproductive failure I: Techniques, J. Reprod. Immunol. 91
(2011) 90.
[32] A. Moﬀett-King, Natural killer cells and pregnancy, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2 (2002)
656.
[33] A. King, N. Balendran, P. Wooding, N.P. Carter, Y.W. Loke, CD3− leukocytes
present in the human uterus during early placentation: phenotypic and morphologic
characterization of the CD56++ population, Dev. Immunol. 1 (1991) 169.
[34] A. Nagler, L.L. Lanier, S. Cwirla, J.H. Phillips, Comparative studies of human FcRIIIpositive and negative natural killer cells, J. Immunol. 143 (1989) 3183.
[35] G. Junovich, A. Azpiroz, E. Incera, C. Ferrer, A. Pasqualini, G. Gutierrez,
Endometrial CD16(+) and CD16(−) NK cell count in fertility and unexplained
infertility, Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 70 (2013) 182.
[36] W.E. Carson, J.G. Giri, M.J. Lindemann, M.L. Linett, M. Ahdieh, R. Paxton, et al.,
Interleukin (IL) 15 is a novel cytokine that activates human natural killer cells via
components of the IL-2 receptor, J. Exp. Med. 180 (1994) 1395.
[37] N. Mariee, T.C. Li, S.M. Laird, Expression of leukaemia inhibitory factor and interleukin 15 in endometrium of women with recurrent implantation failure after
IVF; correlation with the number of endometrial natural killer cells, Hum. Reprod.
27 (2012) 1946.
[38] K. Marzusch, F. Buchholz, P. Ruck, R. Handgretinger, A. Geiselhart, L. Engelmann,
et al., Interleukin-12- and interleukin-2-stimulated release of interferon-gamma by
uterine CD56++ large granular lymphocytes is ampliﬁed by decidual macrophages, Hum. Reprod. 12 (1997) 921.
[39] M. Wu, Y. Yin, M. Zhao, L. Hu, Q. Chen, The low expression of leukemia inhibitory
factor in endometrium: possible relevant to unexplained infertility with multiple
implantation failures, Cytokine 62 (2013) 334.
[40] A. Moﬀett, N. Shreeve, First do no harm: uterine natural killer (NK) cells in assisted
reproduction, Hum. Reprod. 30 (2015) 1519.
[41] S.C. Lobo, S.T. Huang, A. Germeyer, C. Dosiou, K.C. Vo, S. Tulac, et al., The immune
environment in human endometrium during the window of implantation, Am. J.
Reprod. Immunol. 52 (2004) 244.

700

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Human Immunology 79 (2018) 693–701

L. Kofod et al.

between decidual NK and CD14+ myelomonocytic cells results in induction of
Tregs and immunosuppression, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107 (2010) 11918.
[86] M.J. Guimond, B. Wang, B.A. Croy, Engraftment of bone marrow from severe
combined immunodeﬁcient (SCID) mice reverses the reproductive deﬁcits in natural killer cell-deﬁcient tg epsilon 26 mice, J. Exp. Med. 187 (1998) 217.
[87] S.M. Blois, J.M. Ilarregui, M. Tometten, M. Garcia, A.S. Orsal, R. Cordo-Russo, et al.,
A pivotal role for galectin-1 in fetomaternal tolerance, Nat. Med. 13 (2007) 1450.
[88] T. Tilburgs, A.C. Crespo, A. van der Zwan, B. Rybalov, T. Raj, B. Stranger, et al.,
Human HLA-G+ extravillous trophoblasts: Immune-activating cells that interact
with decidual leukocytes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112 (2015) 7219.
[89] W.N. Melsted, S.H. Matzen, M.H. Andersen, T.V.F. Hviid, The choriocarcinoma cell
line JEG-3 upregulates regulatory T cell phenotypes and modulates pro-inﬂammatory cytokines through HLA-G, Cell. Immunol. 324 (2018) 14–23.
[90] R. Buelow, W.J. Burlingham, C. Clayberger, Immunomodulation by soluble HLA
class I, Transplantation 59 (1995) 649.
[91] B.J. Webb, M.R. Bochan, A. Montel, L.M. Padilla, Z. Brahmi, The lack of NK cytotoxicity associated with fresh HUCB may be due to the presence of soluble HLA in
the serum, Cell. Immunol. 159 (1994) 246.
[92] N. Zavazava, M. Kronke, Soluble HLA class I molecules induce apoptosis in alloreactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes, Nat. Med. 2 (1996) 1005.
[93] M. Han, Y. Jiang, K. Lao, X. Xu, S. Zhan, Y. Wang, et al., sHLA-G involved in the
apoptosis of decidual natural killer cells following toxoplasma gondii infection,
Inﬂammation 37 (2014) 1718.
[94] S. Fournel, M. Aguerre-Girr, X. Huc, F. Lenfant, A. Alam, A. Toubert, et al., Cutting
edge: soluble HLA-G1 triggers CD95/CD95 ligand-mediated apoptosis in activated
CD8+ cells by interacting with CD8, J. Immunol. 164 (2000) 6100.
[95] M.M. Hviid, N. Macklon, Immune modulation treatments-where is the evidence?
Fertil. Steril. 107 (2017) 1284.
[96] J. Li, Y. Chen, C. Liu, Y. Hu, L. Li, Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment for repeated IVF/ICSI failure and unexplained infertility: a systematic review and a metaanalysis, Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 70 (2013) 434.
[97] M. Eftekhar, R. Hosseinisadat, R. Baradaran, E. Naghshineh, Eﬀect of granulocyte
colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) on IVF outcomes in infertile women: An RCT, Int.
J. Reprod. Biomed. (Yazd) 14 (2016) 341.
[98] D.H. Barad, Y. Yu, V.A. Kushnir, A. Shohat-Tal, E. Lazzaroni, H.J. Lee, et al., A
randomized clinical trial of endometrial perfusion with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in in vitro fertilization cycles: impact on endometrial thickness and
clinical pregnancy rates, Fertil. Steril. 101 (2014) 710.
[99] L.D. Klentzeris, J.N. Bulmer, M.A. Warren, L. Morrison, T.C. Li, I.D. Cooke,
Lymphoid tissue in the endometrium of women with unexplained infertility: morphometric and immunohistochemical aspects, Hum. Reprod. 9 (1994) 646.
[100] L. Flynn, B. Byrne, J. Carton, P. Kelehan, C. O'Herlihy, C. O'Farrelly, Menstrual
cycle dependent ﬂuctuations in NK and T-lymphocyte subsets from non-pregnant
human endometrium, Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 43 (2000) 209.

late pregnancy in allogeneic mice, J. Reprod. Immunol. 85 (2010) 121.
[71] S. Chen, J. Zhang, C. Huang, W. Lu, Y. Liang, X. Wan, Expression of the T regulatory
cell transcription factor FoxP3 in peri-implantation phase endometrium in infertile
women with endometriosis, Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 10 (2012) 34.
[72] W.H. Yan, A. Lin, B.G. Chen, M.Y. Zhou, M.Z. Dai, X.J. Chen, et al., Possible roles of
KIR2DL4 expression on uNK cells in human pregnancy, Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 57
(2007) 233.
[73] J.N. Bulmer, G.E. Lash, The role of uterine NK cells in normal reproduction and
reproductive disorders, Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 868 (2015) 95.
[74] T.V. Hviid, HLA-G in human reproduction: aspects of genetics, function and pregnancy complications, Hum. Reprod. Update 12 (2006) 209.
[75] S. Djurisic, L. Skibsted, T.V. Hviid, A phenotypic analysis of regulatory T cells and
uterine NK cells from ﬁrst trimester pregnancies and associations with HLA-G, Am.
J. Reprod. Immunol. 74 (2015) 427.
[76] M. Varla-Leftherioti, M. Spyropoulou-Vlachou, T. Keramitsoglou,
M. Papadimitropoulos, C. Tsekoura, O. Graphou, et al., Lack of the appropriate
natural killer cell inhibitory receptors in women with spontaneous abortion, Hum.
Immunol. 66 (2005) 65.
[77] C. Li, B.L. Houser, M.L. Nicotra, J.L. Strominger, HLA-G homodimer-induced cytokine secretion through HLA-G receptors on human decidual macrophages and
natural killer cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106 (2009) 5767.
[78] A. van der Meer, H.G. Lukassen, M.J. van Lierop, F. Wijnands, S. Mosselman,
D.D. Braat, et al., Membrane-bound HLA-G activates proliferation and interferongamma production by uterine natural killer cells, Mol. Hum. Reprod. 10 (2004)
189.
[79] M. Shiroishi, K. Tsumoto, K. Amano, Y. Shirakihara, M. Colonna, V.M. Braud, et al.,
Human inhibitory receptors Ig-like transcript 2 (ILT2) and ILT4 compete with CD8
for MHC class I binding and bind preferentially to HLA-G, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 100 (2003) 8856.
[80] F. Navarro, M. Llano, T. Bellon, M. Colonna, D.E. Geraghty, M. Lopez-Botet, The
ILT2(LIR1) and CD94/NKG2A NK cell receptors respectively recognize HLA-G1 and
HLA-E molecules co-expressed on target cells, Eur. J. Immunol. 29 (1999) 277.
[81] B. Favier, J. Lemaoult, E. Lesport, E.D. Carosella, ILT2/HLA-G interaction impairs
NK-cell functions through the inhibition of the late but not the early events of the
NK-cell activating synapse, FASEB J. 24 (2010) 689.
[82] V. Hofmeister, E.H. Weiss, HLA-G modulates immune responses by diverse receptor
interactions, Semin. Cancer Biol. 13 (2003) 317.
[83] F. Gros, F. Cabillic, O. Toutirais, A.L. Maux, Y. Sebti, L. Amiot, Soluble HLA-G
molecules impair natural killer/dendritic cell crosstalk via inhibition of dendritic
cells, Eur. J. Immunol. 38 (2008) 742.
[84] L.J. Chen, Z.Q. Han, H. Zhou, L. Zou, P. Zou, Inhibition of HLA-G expression via
RNAi abolishes resistance of extravillous trophoblast cell line TEV-1 to NK lysis,
Placenta 31 (2010) 519.
[85] P. Vacca, C. Cantoni, M. Vitale, C. Prato, F. Canegallo, D. Fenoglio, et al., Crosstalk

701

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

