Reproductive BioMedicine Online (2013) 27, 515– 529

www.sciencedirect.com
www.rbmonline.com

SYMPOSIUM: IMPLANTATION
REVIEW

Tissue and circulating microRNA
influence reproductive function in endometrial
disease
M Louise Hull *, Victoria Nisenblat
The Robinson Institute, Research Centre for Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide, Australia; The Women’s
and Children’s Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Adelaide, Australia
* Corresponding author. E-mail address: louise.hull@adelaide.edu.au (M Louise Hull).
Dr Louise Hull is a reproductive medicine subspecialist who has cared for infertility patients for 17 years in
Christchurch, New Zealand, Cambridge, UK and Adelaide, Australia. She is senior lecturer at the University of
Adelaide and her endometriosis research group has published several articles exploring microRNA and
microarray technology and novel mouse models of endometriosis. She is an international ambassador for the
World Endometriosis Society, an associate editor for Human Reproduction and a member of the Faculty of 1000.
Dr Hull is a founding member of the FertilitySA IVF unit and is the current new developments director.

Abstract microRNA (miRNA) have emerged as important epigenetic modulators of gene expression in diverse pathological and physiological processes. In the endometrium, miRNA appear to have a role in the dynamic changes associated with the menstrual cycle,
in implantation and in the pathophysiology associated with reproductive disorders such as recurrent miscarriage and endometriosis.
This review explores the role of miRNA in endometrial physiology and endometrial disorders of reproduction and also raises the prospect that circulating miRNA may modulate endometrial function or reflect disordered endometrial activity. The clinical potential to
use miRNA in diagnostic tests of endometrial function or in the treatment of endometrial disorders will also be discussed. RBMOnline
ª 2013, Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
KEYWORDS: endometriosis, endometrium, implantation, microRNA, miscarriage

Introduction
microRNA (miRNA) are highly conserved 9–22-nucleotide-long
non-protein-encoding RNA that represent only a small fraction
(0.01%) of the total RNA mass. However, since their initial
discovery in Caenorhabditis elegans two decades ago (Lee
et al., 1993), miRNA have been found to regulate more than
30% of the human genome (Bartel, 2009). The latest version

(version 19) of miRBase sequence database lists 25,141 mature
miRNA sequences in 193 species, including 2216 mature human
miRNA (Griffiths-Jones et al., 2008).
The endometrium is a steroid-hormone-responsive tissue
that undergoes highly organized cyclic structural changes in
preparation for embryo implantation during the reproductive years. Large numbers of miRNA have been identified
in the endometrium in both normal and disease states,

1472-6483/$ - see front matter ª 2013, Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rbmo.2013.07.012

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

516

M Louise Hull, V Nisenblat

and functional studies have demonstrated miRNA regulatory
pathways in this dynamic tissue. More recently, circulating
miRNA have been shown to influence cells at a site distant
to their origin (Valadi et al., 2007). The possibility that circulating miRNA may reflect endometrial function or dysfunction is beginning to be explored, as is the possibility
that circulating miRNA that reflect endometrial disease
could provide noninvasive diagnostic information.
This review focuses on the emerging roles of miRNA in
healthy endometrium and their aberrant expression in endometrial tissues and blood in pathological states. The most
recent studies in this rapidly emerging field are emphasized,
updating the information provided in the review by Pan and
Chegini (2008). Reviews outlining the role of miRNA in ovarian function, pregnancy-related pathologies, endometrial
cancer and leiomyoma have been undertaken (Carletti and
Christenson, 2009; Gilabert-Estelles et al., 2012; Hawkins
et al., 2011a; Nothnick, 2012) and are beyond the brief of
this paper.

Biogenesis and function of miRNA
Most miRNA genes are intergenic or orientated antisense to
neighbouring genes and are thought to be independently
transcribed by polymerase II, although some lie in intronic
regions of protein-encoding genes (Lee and Ambros, 2001).
In the canonical miRNA biogenesis pathway, DNA is transcribed into primary miRNA in the nucleus and then cleaved
to pre-miRNA by the Drosha enzyme. Alternatively,
pre-miRNA hairpins can be generated through splicing and
debranching by the lariat debranching enzyme (Ldbr) in
the Drosha-independent mirtron pathway (Ruby et al., 2007;
Westholm and Lai, 2011) (Figure 1).
Pre-miRNA are exported into the cell cytoplasm, where
they are further cleaved by the DICER enzyme to yield
miRNA–miRNA* duplexes (reviewed by Bartel, 2004). These
duplexes unwind, and the ‘guide strand’ (the mature
miRNA) binds to Argonaute (Ago) proteins in the RNA-induced
silencing complex (RISC). In mammals, targeted translational repression is effected by the RISC complex binding
to the 30 -untranslated region of select messenger RNA
(mRNA) (Filipowicz et al., 2008). Deactivated mRNA bound
to the miRNA–RISC complex accumulate in cytoplasmic
structures called P-bodies, where they are degraded or
stored (Filipowicz et al., 2008). Generally, miRNA repress
transcription of their targeted miRNA; however, in rare circumstances miRNA appear to be able to stimulate target
mRNA translation (Vasudevan et al., 2007; Figure 1). There
is evidence that miRNA-bound mRNA can also be released
from P-bodies and become translationally active
(Bhattacharyya et al., 2006). miRNA regulatory mechanisms
are complex, with most miRNA able to regulate several hundred transcripts and several miRNA often regulating one
mRNA target (Bartel, 2009). miRNA with a common mRNA
target can be co-transcribed from a single miRNA gene cluster to amplify their repressive effect. Furthermore, miRNA
and transcription factors are able to form reciprocal regulatory loops, through which gene expression is tightly controlled (Flynt and Lai, 2008).
miRNA can be transferred across the cell membrane into
the systemic blood circulation, where they exist in a

Figure 1 Biogenesis, mechanism of action and extracellular
secretion of microRNA (miRNA). Pri-miRNA are transcribed by
polymerase II (POL II) in the nucleus and processed by Drosha
into pre-miRNA. An alternative non-canonical pathway is
generated by certain debranched introns, called ‘mirtrons’,
which undergo splicing and mimic the structural features of
pre-miRNA, entering the miRNA-processing pathway without
Drosha-mediated cleavage. Exportin transports pre-miRNA
molecules to the cytoplasm, where DICER generates miRNA–
miRNA* duplexes. These are converted into single-strand
mature miRNA and incorporated into the RNA-induced silencing
complex (RISC), which sequence-specifically binds to miRNA
target sites on mRNA transcripts, effecting mRNA cleavage and
degradation or, if the alignment if imperfect, repression of
gene translation. Pre-miRNA are exported from cells via two
mechanisms: (i) in multivesicular bodies (MVB), which release
miRNA into the circulation via fusion with the cell membrane;
and (ii) in association with RNA-binding proteins such as
nucleophosmin 1 (NPM1), argonaute 2 (Ago2) or high-density
lipoprotein (HDL). Circulating miRNA are taken up by the
recipient cells either by endocytosis or, if protein bound, by
receptor-mediated interactions at the cell surface. miRNA
internalized by recipient cells can inhibit the expression of
target protein-coding genes.

cell-free form. Circulating miRNA reside in microvesicles
and other lipoprotein complexes, such as exosomes, microparticles and apoptotic bodies, which confer protection
from endogenous RNase activity (Hunter et al., 2008; Pegtel
et al., 2010; Taylor and Gercel-Taylor, 2008; Valadi et al.,

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

microRNA in endometrial disease
2007; Wang et al., 2010). Exosomes and microparticles are
formed through the inward budding of the endosomal or
plasma membrane around miRNA, which are later released
to the circulation via fusion with the cell membrane (Kosaka
et al., 2010; Pegtel et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2010). Fluxes
of calcium, cytoskeleton reorganization and sphingomyelinase 2 activity (a rate-limiting enzyme in ceramide biosynthesis) control the formation and release of exosomes and
microparticles from cells (Kosaka et al., 2010; Figure 1).
The expression profile of microvesicular miRNA and released
miRNA do not correlate well with that of their cells of origin
(Valadi et al., 2007), signifying that specific miRNA are
likely to be selected either for intracellular retention or
for release by exosomes. Moreover, different stimuli alter
the number, composition and origin of microparticles and
modify the release of miRNA (Pula et al., 2008), supporting
the assumption that packaging and extracellular transport
of miRNA is a highly regulated process.
Up to 90% of extravesicular plasma and serum miRNA
co-fractionate with protein and lipoprotein complexes
(Cortez et al., 2011) in blood. High-density lipoprotein
(Vickers et al., 2011), the Ago2 component of the RISC complex (Arroyo et al., 2011; Turchinovich et al., 2011) and
nucleophosmin (NPM1; Wang et al., 2010) are some of the
proteins that complex with extravesicular miRNA during
their intravascular transport.
The recipient cells take up circulating miRNA by endocytosis or through binding to receptors capable of recognizing
miRNA-binding proteins at the cell membrane surface. Exosomal miRNA are processed by the same machinery used in
miRNA biogenesis. Like cellular miRNA, exosomal miRNA
promote gene silencing (Iguchi et al., 2010; Kosaka et al.,
2010) and effect widespread changes in cell physiology
(Cortez et al., 2011). In a similar fashion, miRNA–lipoprotein
complexes alter the expression of target genes that can
induce cellular responses. For example, miRNA bound to
high-density lipoproteins were demonstrated to alter the
cellular miRNA pool and repress miRNA targets through activation of a ceramide signalling pathway (Vickers et al.,
2011; Figure 1).

Endometrial expression of miRNA across the
menstrual cycle
The endometrial cycle comprises reproductive hormonedependent morphological and biochemical changes. In the
proliferative phase, ovarian oestradiol induces endometrial
cell proliferation, whereas secretory-phase progesterone and
oestradiol induce endometrial cell differentiation, before
falling concentrations of both hormones in the case of no pregnancy results in endometrial menstrual shedding. Endometrial
disorders such as impaired endometrial receptivity, dysfunctional uterine bleeding and endometriosis are thought to arise
from aberrations in the cellular and molecular homeostasis of
the endometrium. The role of steroids in regulating functions
such as the onset of receptivity is reviewed in the accompanying article by Young (2013).
One of the first human studies to assess miRNA expression in endometrial tissues compared isolated stromal and
epithelial primary cell cultures from women in the early
to mid-secretory phase of the menstrual cycle and identified

517
32 differentially expressed miRNA (Pan et al., 2007).
Endometrium-specific miRNA expression appeared to be
cell-type-dependent, raising the possibility of miRNA-mediated cross-talk between the endometrial cellular compartments. The differentially expressed miRNA were predicted
to target genes known to play critical roles in several endometrial functions, including transforming growth factor b
(TGFb), TGFb receptors, oestrogen receptors, progesterone
receptors and aromatase (CYP19A1) (Pan et al., 2007).
Pan et al. (2007) also demonstrated that oestradiol and
progesterone, alone or in combination with their antagonists (ICI-182780 and RU486, respectively), cell-specifically
altered the expression of miR-20a, miR-21 and miR-26a in
stromal and epithelial human endometrial primary cell cultures. The expression of miR-17-5p, miR-23a, miR-23b and
miR-542-3p and of their targets, which include CYP19A1,
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein and cyclo-oxygenase
2 was oestradiol dependent and central to endometrial
proliferation (Toloubeydokhti et al., 2008). Oestradioldependent up-regulation of miR-155, miR-429 and miR-451
and down-regulation of miR-181b and miR-204 was also seen
in mouse uteri (Nothnick and Healy, 2010; Nothnick et al.,
2010). There is evidence that oestradiol may affect miRNA
activity by binding to the Drosha complex and inhibiting
the processing of pri-miRNA (Cochrane et al., 2011; Klinge,
2012; Yamagata et al., 2009).
Oestradiol alters miRNA expression in the supraphysiological hormonal milieu created for in-vitro cell culture experiments. However, the physiological effect of
reproductive steroids on miRNA signatures in human endometrial tissues is just starting to be delineated. Kuokkanen
et al. (2010) performed a miRNA array analysis, using RNA
extracted from human epithelial cells isolated from
late-proliferative-phase and mid-secretory-phase endometrium (4 samples in each cycle phase). Twenty-four differentially expressed miRNA were identified when the cycle
phases were compared, of which 12 miRNA were upregulated in the mid-secretory phase (Kuokkanen et al.,
2010). Predicted targets of menstrual-phase-specific miRNA
were identified in a parallel mRNA microarray analysis and
were associated with DNA replication, cell cycle progression
and cell proliferation. Over-expression of miRNA that
repress cell cycle progression was seen in the secretory
phase and may represent a pathway for progesterone’s ability to moderate the proliferative effects of oestradiol.
Other mRNA profiling studies that have characterized the
mRNA transcriptome at different phases of the menstrual
cycle support these findings (Borthwick et al., 2003; Burney
et al., 2007; Dennis et al., 2003; Petracco et al., 2012). Of
note, miRNA profiling of endometrial tissues that include
both epithelial and stromal components has not been performed in a menstrual-cycle-phase comparison experiment.
Smaller studies have identified individual miRNA with
cycle-specific endometrial expression patterns. Petracco
et al. (2011) demonstrated that miR-135a and miR-135b
were down-regulated in early secretory endometrial tissues
and directly suppressed expression of the transcription factor homeobox A10 (HOXA10). In human endometrium,
HOXA10 peaks during the implantation window and regulates various cell adhesion molecules and signal transduction factors that are essential for endometrial receptivity
(Zanatta et al., 2010). Ramon et al. (2011) reported

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

518
increased concentrations of the angiogenesis regulating
miRNA miR-15b, miR-20a and miR-221 in secretory-phase
eutopic endometrium from healthy women, indicating that
a highly regulatory environment is likely to be required for
angiogenesis at this vital time.
The evidence that endometrial miRNA exhibit dynamic
expression throughout the menstrual cycle strongly suggests
that they have a role in maintaining homeostasis in this
complex tissue. In this scenario, changes in miRNA activity
could impair endometrial function, potentially having a negative impact on implantation and menstrual bleeding patterns. It is also possible that iatrogenic miRNA
manipulation in endometrial dysfunction could correct
endometrial disorders; however, more knowledge regarding
endometrial miRNA function and its safe manipulation is
required before this becomes a clinical reality.

miRNA in implantation
Complex structural and biochemical changes occur in the
endometrium to effect endometrial receptivity during the
‘window of implantation’, a limited period in the midsecretory phase of the menstrual cycle (usually days
19–23 of a 28-day cycle). These changes, in conjunction
with decidualization (stromal cell differentiation in
response to progesterone), are prerequisites for establishing and sustaining a pregnancy (Harper, 1992). Impaired
endometrial receptivity and/or decidual aberrations are
thought to underpin infertility, fertility treatment failure
and recurrent pregnancy loss (Macklon et al., 2006). Endometrial receptivity is still poorly understood and, although
many attempts have been made to identify markers of a
receptive endometrium, none are in clinical use (Horcajadas et al., 2007; Koot et al., 2012). The obstacles to the
development of clinically useful biomarkers of receptivity
are discussed in the accompanying article by Salamonsen
et al. (2013). More recently, researchers have provided
evidence of a role for epigenetic regulatory mechanisms
in endometrial receptivity and implantation events (Munro
et al., 2010; Table 1).
Rodent implantation models have provided insights into
miRNA activity in the implantation window. A nextgeneration sequencing study identified 563 dysregulated
mRNA, 62 dysregulated miRNA and an increase in mature
miRNA editing in mouse endometrium that exhibited an
active implantation state when compared with endometrium displaying delayed implantation (Su et al., 2010).
The oestradiol-dominant pre-receptive-phase murine endometrium was compared with that from the progesterone-dominant receptive phase and 37 dysregulated miRNA
were identified (Chakrabarty et al., 2007). miR-101a and
miR-199a regulated cyclo-oxygenase 2 expression, an enzyme
required for implantation that controls the rate-limiting
step in prostaglandin synthesis (Chakrabarty et al., 2007).
miR-21, one of the implantation-specific miRNA in rodents
(Xia et al., 2010), was down-regulated by progesterone in
ovariectomized mice, which may explain the detrimental
effect of prematurely elevated progesterone on endometrial
receptivity in IVF programmes. miR-21 regulates blood vessel
remodelling through its suppressive regulation of a membrane-anchored metalloproteinase inhibitor, reversion-inducing-

M Louise Hull, V Nisenblat
cysteine-rich protein with kazal motifs (RECK) (Chandana
et al., 2010; Hu et al., 2008). RECK may facilitate
angiogenic implantation events as it is usually downregulated at endometrial implantation sites. In a
prematurely progestagenic environment, reduced miR-21
concentrations were associated with increased RECK
concentrations, which would be predicted to lead to inhibition of vascular development (Shulman et al., 1996).
The translation of the established effects of miR-21 in
murine implantation to human pathophysiology is
questionable as women undertaking IVF with a premature
progesterone rise did not demonstrate down-regulation of
miR-21 in the endometrium (Li et al., 2011). It was also
speculated that miR-21 can be regulated by the endometrial
receptivity marker leukaemia inhibitor factor, via signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3; however, this
premise requires experimental validation (Carletti and
Christenson, 2009).
Decidualization of primary human endometrial stromal
cell cultures can be induced in vitro to create a human
model of this critical implantation process. miRNAome analysis comparing decidualized to nondecidualized human
endometrial stromal cells identified a panel of differentially
expressed miRNA (Estella et al., 2012; Qian et al., 2009;
Table 1). These miRNA were predicted to alter transcripts
for actin filaments, which are key protein markers of the cellular differentiation that occurs during decidualization.
Other transcript targets known to influence the decidualization process included epidermal growth factor receptor, vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A), TGFb2 and
HOXA10 (Estella et al., 2012; Giudice et al., 2002; Haouzi
et al., 2009; Popovici et al., 2000). Loss-of-function manipulation of some of these miRNA revealed that miR-222 and
miR-29b altered the expression levels of genes important
in adhesion and extracellular matrix formation (Qian et al.,
2009), whereas an over expression of miR-29b effected a
blunted decidualization response (Hawkins et al., 2011b).
Two studies have profiled miRNA in endometria from fertile (Altmäe et al., 2012a) and infertile women (Sha et al.,
2011), comparing the mid-secretory window of implantation
with endometrium from the early secretory phase to identify implantation-associated miRNA (Table 1). The intersection of the predicted and experimentally validated targets
of these miRNA included a panel of transcripts previously
suggested as important for endometrial receptivity, including calpastatin, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator, fibroblast growth factor receptor 2, leukaemia
inhibitor factor (Altmäe et al., 2012a) and osteopontin (Sha
et al., 2011). These miRNA and their targets make up networks that have functional relevance to implantation, such
as axon guidance, Wnt/b-catenin, extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase, TGFb and
tumour protein 53 pathways (Altmäe et al., 2012b; Horcajadas et al., 2007). An altered miRNA profile consistent with a
shift in endometrial maturation was observed when natural
and stimulated cycles were compared, suggesting that miRNA signatures could be reliable markers of endometrial
receptivity and maturation (Sha et al., 2011).
A genome-wide analysis revealed four down-regulated
miRNA (miR-451, miR-424, miR-30b and miR-125b) and 22
dysregulated mRNA transcripts in women undertaking IVF
with decreased endometrial receptivity due to elevated

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

microRNA in endometrial disease
progesterone concentrations on the day of human chorionic
gonadotrophin compared with women with normal progesterone concentrations (Li et al., 2011). Osteopontin and
VEGF were predicted and validated targets of these miRNA,
promoting tissue remodelling and angiogenesis respectively.
Both osteopontin and VEGF transcripts are significantly
up-regulated in endometrium during the implantation window and high VEGF concentrations are positively correlated
with implantation rates in IVF–intracytoplasmic sperm
injection cycles (Haouzi et al., 2009).
miRNA have been implicated as causal factors in implantation failure, which is defined as repeated intrauterine
transfers of high-quality embryos without pregnancy during
IVF. A miRNA array study of mid-secretory endometrium
from women with repeated implantation failure identified
a panel of 13 dysregulated miRNA (Revel et al., 2011).
Two miRNA, miR-23b and miR-145, were confirmed as
over-expressed, whereas their predicted targets, a group
of cell adhesion molecules involved in implantation,
(N-cadherin, H2A histone family, member X, netrin-4 and
secreted frizzled-related protein 4) were down-regulated
in samples from an independent cohort of patients with
implantation defects (Revel et al., 2011).
Although endometrial receptivity is imperative, successful implantation also depends on oocyte and embryo quality
(Cakmak and Taylor, 2011). miRNA involved in oocyte and
embryo development have been described in association
with a range of pregnancy-related disorders; however, this
literature is beyond the scope of this review (Choudhury
and Friedman, 2012; Hossain et al., 2012; Morales Prieto
and Markert, 2011; Novakovic and Saffery, 2012).
There is ample evidence that miRNA are important in
endometrial receptivity and decidualization although further
work is required to determine their precise roles in these
events. In this early phase of endometrial miRNA exploration,
it is still too soon to determine if miRNA can be viewed as
diagnostic markers of implantation disorders or as novel
therapeutic agents to correct implantation defects.

The role of miRNA in recurrent miscarriage
Endometrial alterations have been previously reported in
women with a history of recurrent miscarriage, including
aberrant expression of immune cell populations (Quenby
et al., 1999) and proinflammatory, anti-inflammatory and
angiogenic cytokines and growth factors (Banerjee et al.,
2012). Transcriptome alterations have also been identified
by messenger RNA microarray studies comparing secretoryphase endometrium from women suffering recurrent
miscarriage and that from fertile subjects (Mokhtar et al.,
2012). As far as is known, there are no miRNA expression
studies assessing the endometrium from women afflicted
by recurrent miscarriage.
Wang et al. (2012b) demonstrated a 30-times greater
expression of miR-133a in chorionic villi from women with
recurrent miscarriage compared with women who had an
induced abortion at 7 weeks of gestation. miR-133a was
shown to repress the human leukocyte antigen HLA-G (Wang
et al., 2012b), a protein which in increased in chorionic villi
at 6–7 weeks gestation and is known to have an important
role in maternal immune tolerance to the fetus (Jiang
et al., 2012). The authors suggested that miR-133 is

519
involved in pathogenesis of recurrent miscarriage, via interference with fetal–maternal tolerance.
miRNA may play a role in progesterone support of early
pregnancy. In addition to endometrial support, progesterone protects the conceptus from maternal immune attack,
inhibiting T-lymphocyte activity and decreasing production
of inflammatory cytokines (Miyaura and Iwata, 2002). The
mechanism for progesterone’s immune suppressive affects
appears to be via inhibited nuclear factor kappa B (NFjB)
activation in macrophages, which suppresses lipopolysaccharide-induced miR-155 expression. Low concentrations
of miR-155 resulted in the up-regulation of suppressor of
cytokine signalling 1 which inhibits interleukin (IL)-6 and
interferon c production (Sun et al., 2012). Increasing
miR-155 activity attenuated progesterone’s inhibition on
IL-6 and interferon c expression, promoting an inflammatory
environment less suitable for placentation. This raises the
possibility that miRNA manipulation could be a new strategy
for maintenance of progesterone-induced immunosuppressive signals (Sun et al., 2012).

Altered miRNA expression in endometriosis
Eutopic endometrial tissues
Endometriosis causes pelvic pain and infertility in reproductive-age women (Giudice and Kao, 2004). Although the
cause of endometriosis is still uncertain, Sampson’s theory
states that eutopic endometrial tissue is flushed retrogradely through the Fallopian tubes during menstruation,
where it attaches and grows (Sampson, 1927). There is
increasing evidence that women with endometriosis have
a genetic and/or environmental predisposition which
enhances ectopic endometrial tissue development, because
only 10% of women develop endometriotic disease whereas
90% of women suffer from retrograde menstruation. Inherent abnormalities in eutopic endometrium are likely to contribute to the pathophysiology of endometriosis and may be
fundamental to endometriosis-related subfertility due to
implantation defects. Endometriosis-associated endometrial changes may also have diagnostic potential as biomarkers to distinguish women with and without disease.
Like proteomic and genomic alterations, differentially
regulated miRNA have been identified in eutopic endometrium from women with endometriosis. In a comparison of
three control mid-secretory-phase endometrium (n = 3) with
endometria from four women with severe endometriosis
(Burney et al., 2009), six down-regulated endometriosisassociated miRNA were identified from the miR-9 and
miR-34 miRNA families. It was suggested that miR-34
participates in maintaining a proliferative endometrial profile
and may mediate the delayed proliferative to secretory
transition of endometrium observed in women with advanced
endometriosis.
A further comparison of eutopic endometrium between
women with mild or severe endometriosis was performed
using microarrays that incorporated both mRNA and miRNA.
An increased expression of miR-21 and DICER was identified
in severe endometriosis as were differences in the transcriptome between the two disease stages. This suggests that
mild and severe stages of endometriosis are distinct

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

520

Summary of miRNA profiling studies in human endometrium during the implantation window.

Study

Samples

Detection platform

Dysregulated miRNA

Predicted target genes

Validated target genes

Qian et al. (2009)

Decidualized versus nondecidualized HESC

Hybridization
oligonucleotide miRNA
microarray

49 miRNA (16 ›, 33 ﬂ): 11
validated by qRT-PCR (miR27b, miR-30c, miR-143, miR101, miR-181b, miR-29b,
miR-30d, miR-507, miR-23a,
miR-222, miR-221: all ﬂ)

Transcriptional factors,
extracellular matrix-related
molecules, intracellular
signalling molecules, growth
factors, cytokines
(decidualization)

ﬂ miR-222 ﬁ › CDKN1C/
p57kip (cell
differentiation)

Estella et al. (2012)

Decidualized versus nondecidualized HESC

Human whole-genome
miRNA PCR array

43 miRNA (26 ›, 17 ﬂ): ﬂ
predominantly three miRNA
families (miR-181, miR-183,
miR-200) and › DICER mRNA

Transcriptional factors,
growth factors, interleukins,
matrix remodelling enzymes
(decidualization)

› miR-96 and miR135b ﬁ ﬂ FOXO1,
HOXA10, IGFPB1 (decidual
transformation)
DICER knockdown
No change in expression of
decidual markers (FOXO1,
C/EBPB, COX2, SP1)

Altmae et al. (2012a)

Receptive versus prereceptive endometrium in
healthy fertile women
(LH + 7, n = 4 versus LH + 2,
n = 5)

Agilent hybridization
miRNA microarray

3 miRNA: 2 › (miR-30b, miR30d), 1 ﬂ (miR-494)

CAST, CFTR, FGFR2, LIF,
DPYSL2, F11R, MTF1, NPAS2,
P4HA2, PPRGC1A, TACC2,
RAB40B (implantation)
Intersection of the
predicted and
experimentally validated
targets

Sha et al. (2011)

Receptive versus prereceptive endometrium in
infertile women: natural
cycles (LH + 7, n = 5 versus
LH + 2, n = 5) and stimulated
IVF cycles (HCG + 7, n = 5
versus HCG + 4, n = 5)

Next-generation
sequencing

20 miRNA: 8 › (miR-30d,
miR-30b, miR-30b*, miR-31,
miR-21*, miR-193a-5p,,miR193a3p, miR-203), 12 ﬂ
(miR-33a, miR-452, miR125b, miR-455-3p, miR-4555p, miR-483-5p, miR-143*,
miR-100, miR-504, miR-424,
miR-424*, miR-503)

Genes involved in cell cycle,
cell adhesion and
metabolism
Intersection of the
predicted and
experimentally validated
targets in independent
microarray studies
Reciprocal relationship
between miR-424 (ﬂ) and
osteopontin gene (›)

M Louise Hull, V Nisenblat

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 1

521

ESC = endometrial stromal cell; HCG = human chorionic gonadotrophin; qRT-PCR = quantitative reverse-transcription PCR; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor.

Adherens junction, Wnt
signalling, cell adhesion
molecules (implantation)
13 miRNA: 10 › (miR-23b,
miR-145, miR-99a, miR-27b,
miR-652, miR-139-5p, miR195, miR-342-3p, miR-150,
miR-374b), 3 ﬂ (miR-32,
miR-628-5p, miR-874), miR23b and miR-145 validated
by qRT-PCR
PCR-based TaqMan miRNA
arrays
Secretory endometrium; 12
fertile women versus 11
women with repeated
implantation failure
Revel et al. (2011)

Osteopontin and VEGF both
predicted and validated
targets (implantation
markers)
Hybridization
oligonucleotide miRNA
microarray
Endometrium day-6 post
oocyte retrieval: 12 infertile
women with elevated
progesterone on the day of
HCG versus 7 women with
normal progesterone
Li et al. (2011)

4 miRNA ﬂ (miR-451, miR424, miR-30b miR-125b), 22
dysregulated mRNA (13 ›,
9 ﬂ)

ﬂ H2AFX, sFRP-4, ncadherin, netrin-4, all
targets of miR-145 (cell
adhesion)

microRNA in endometrial disease

disorders with significant molecular and signalling pathway
differences that are likely to be regulated by miRNA
(Aghajanova and Giudice, 2011).
Additional studies have explored individual miRNA in
eutopic endometrium from women with endometriosis.
Compared with healthy controls, endometrium from women
with endometriosis is characterized by over-expression of
miR-135a in the proliferative phase and miR-135b in the proliferative and secretory phases (Petracco et al., 2011).
These miRNA were predicted and validated to target
HOXA10, a key mediator of endometrial receptivity (Taylor
et al., 1999), the expression of which was simultaneously
repressed in the endometrium of women with endometriosis. Transfection of endometrial stromal cells with
miR-135a/b or miR-135a/b inhibitors resulted in an altered
expression of HOXA10 mRNA and protein and this may suppress endometrial receptivity in endometriosis.
The transfection of endometrial cells with miR-199a
repressed IjB kinase/NFjB signalling and inhibited IL-8
secretion. Therefore, the low expression levels of miR-199a
in endometrial stromal cells from women with endometriosis (Dai et al., 2012) would be expected to up-regulate
these inflammatory mediators and result in decreased endometrial receptivity and implantation defects. IL-8 is elevated in peritoneal fluid from women with endometriosis
and its negative effect on embryo quality could also account
for reduced implantation in women with endometriosis (Wu
and Ho, 2003).

Ectopic endometrial tissues
Proteins, transcripts and miRNA that are specific to
endometriotic lesion establishment can be identified when
eutopic and ectopic endometrial tissues are compared. As
outlined in recent reviews (Hawkins et al., 2011a; Ohlsson
Teague et al., 2010), four studies have determined the
miRNAome of ectopic endometrial tissues (ovarian or peritoneal) with paired or unpaired eutopic endometrium from
women with endometriosis or eutopic endometrium from
healthy controls, using microarrays or next-generation
sequencing (Table 2) (Filigheddu et al., 2010; Hawkins
et al., 2011b; Ohlsson Teague et al., 2009; Pan et al., 2007).
There was considerable heterogeneity between the studies
in terms of design, control group selection, analysis methods and the location of ectopic endometrial tissues. Each
study identified a unique set of differentially expressed
miRNA, with at least 22% of the dysregulated miRNA in every
experiment being present in gene lists from other papers
(Figure 2). Twenty-two endometriosis-associated miRNA
were identified in the analysis by Ohlsson Teague et al.
(2009), of which 60% were concordant with Filigheddu
et al. (2010), 36% with Pan et al. (2007) and 23% with Hawkins et al. (2011b; Figure 2). Predicted targets of miRNA
differentially expressed in endometriosis revealed biologically important pathways and molecular networks known
to be associated with endometriosis including angiogenesis,
tissue remodelling and TGFb signalling pathways. Postulation regarding the role of miRNA in endometriotic disease
was able to be undertaken (Hawkins et al., 2011a; Ohlsson
Teague et al., 2010). It is important to note that the evidence supporting these hypotheses is largely indirect, based
on in-silico computational analyses.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

522
Table 2

M Louise Hull, V Nisenblat
Global miRNA profiling studies in endometriosis.

Study

Sample tested

Cycle phase

Results

Burney et al. (2009)

Eutopic in endometriosis (n = 4)
versus eutopic controls (n = 3)
Eutopic versus ectopic (n = 8)
in endometriosis
Eutopic versus ectopic in
endometriosis (n = 13)
Eutopic in controls (n = 11)
versus ectopic in endometriosis (n = 10)
Paired ectopic–eutopic patients (n = 4),
ectopic patients (n = 4), eutopic controls (n = 4)
Endometriotic endometrial stromal cell cultures (n = 8)
versus normal endometrial stromal cell cultures (n = 8)

Early secretory

6 miRNA

Proliferative and secretory

22 miRNA

Early proliferative

50 miRNA

Proliferative and secretory

22 miRNA

Early to mid-secretory

50 miRNA

Mid to late proliferative

12 miRNA

Ohlsson Teague et al. (2009)
Filigheddu et al. (2010)
Hawkins et al. (2011b)
Pan et al. (2007)
Abe et al. (2013)

One study has recently explored the miRNA microarray
profile of eight primary endometriotic cyst stromal cell cultures in comparison to eight primary normal endometrial
stromal cell cultures. Four up-regulated and eight
down-regulated miRNA were identified in endometriotic
cyst stromal cell cultures, with three (miR-99b-5p, -99a-3p
and -424) being previously identified in the microarray dataset of Ohlsson Teague et al. (2009). Subsequent luciferase
assay experiments determined that down-regulated
miR-96b directly repressed its target mRNA, c-myc and B
cell lymphoma/leukaemia 2 (BCL2) in the same established
cell cultures. Furthermore, induced over-expression of
miR-96b in ECSCs resulted in increased apoptosis and suppression of proliferation in functional assays. The low
miR-96b concentrations in endometriomas would be predicted to promote proliferation and suppress apoptosis,
both of which are likely to promote endometriotic tissue
growth (Abe et al., 2013).
It is difficult to assess the effect of cell culture conditions on miRNA expression profiles from isolated stromal
cells. Gene expression profiling studies of laser-captured
tissue compartments from endometriotic tissues may clarify
this in the future although the stromal tissue compartment
is still likely to contain a heterogeneous mix of several cell
types.

Figure 2 Concordance between published miRNA profiling
studies in endometriosis. The Venn diagram represents comparison between the miRNA studies and demonstrates the
number of overlapping miRNA in the datasets.

In-vitro methods are required to verify miRNA regulation
of a predicted target mRNA. In cell lines, quantitative PCR
combined with Western blotting can quantify the concentrations of a mRNA target and the protein it encodes in
the absence and presence of the miRNA of interest. This
can provide indirect evidence that a miRNA represses the
protein production of a particular target. The luciferase
assay provides direct evidence of miRNA regulation of a specific mRNA target and is the gold standard for target verification. In this assay, the predicted miRNA-binding site of a
target transcript is linked to the luciferase gene, which
encodes a luminescent protein. When a miRNA that targets
the mRNA-binding site is introduced into a cell line containing this reporter construct, luciferase activity is repressed
and chemiluminescence is measurably reduced. Only a small
number of miRNA–mRNA interactions have been experimentally confirmed in endometriosis and there is a need
to develop high-throughput methodologies to enhance the
efficiency of validating miRNA target transcripts.
Endometriotic tissue is highly complex and to date all
miRNA expression profiling studies, apart from the study
by Abe et al. (2013), have been performed in whole tissues.
There is a complex interaction between the ectopic endometrium and its host site of attachment at the cellular
and molecular levels. When human endometrium is
xenografted into immunocompromised mice, speciesspecific immunohistochemical staining demonstrates that
the glandular epithelium retains human characteristics,
whereas species derivation in the stroma is heterogeneous,
with macrophage, myofibroblast and endotheial cell populations being predominantly host derived (Hull et al., 2008).
Using in-situ hybridization, this study group has shown that
miRNA which are dysregulated in endometriosis can be confined to the epithelial or stromal compartment of endometrial tissues (Figure 3). It is critical to determine the
cellular origin of endometriosis-associated miRNA in order
to select appropriate cell lines that will demonstrate a representative functional effect that is relevant to the
endometriotic disease process.
Early functional studies in endometriosis which have
undertaken gain- or loss-of-function manipulations in eutopic and ectopic endometrial cell lineages have provided

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

microRNA in endometrial disease

523

Figure 3 Cellular localization of miR-141 and miR-100 in eutopic endometrial tissue. In-situ hybridization reveals that miR-141
localizes to the glandular and luminal epithelium, whereas miR-100 localizes to stromal cells in eutopic endometrial tissues.
Bars = 300 lm. Courtesy of Dr. Jonathan McGuane.

experimental confirmation of some miRNA–mRNA relationships in endometriosis (Table 3). For example, the extracellular matrix molecule collagen type VII A1 (COL7A1),
transcription factor AP-2c (TFAP2C) and the transmembranous signalling protein uroplakin 1B are predicted targets
of miR-29c, which was found to be up-regulated in endometrioma when compared with independent eutopic endometrial tissue samples from women without endometriosis
(Hawkins et al., 2011b). These targets were down-regulated
in endometrioma tissues, which is consistent with their regulation by miR-29c. A miR-29c mimic suppressed their
expression, whereas an inhibitor of miR-29c enhanced
expression of COL7A and TFAP2C when transfected into
human endometrial stromal cell cultures from eight control
women.
Hawkins et al. (2011b) demonstrated some of the difficulties in undertaking functional miRNA studies in endometrial tissues when they attempted to demonstrate that
miR-29c had a direct regulatory effect on COL7A1 and
TFAP2C expression using the luciferase assay. Human endometrial stromal fibroblasts were resistant to transfection of

Table 3

the luciferase construct and mimics or inhibitors. An alternate cell line, HEK293T, which does not constitutively
express miR-29c and is unrelated to the endometrium, was
required to demonstrate the direct targeting effect of
miR-29c on COL7A1 and TFAP2C and this finding was extrapolated to endometrial tissues
Lin et al. (2012) utilized luciferase assays to explore
direct targeting of dual-specificity phosphatase 2 (DUSP2)
by miR-20a after this group had measured miR-20a as
up-regulated in endometriotic tissues, although they did
not state their quantitative PCR normalization methods.
The 30 -untranslated region of DUSP2 was cloned into a luciferase reporter system and transfected with pre-miR-20a
into normal endometrial stromal cells. Pre-miR-20 suppressed luciferase activity and DUSP2 protein concentrations whereas an anti-miR20a hairpin inhibitor induced the
opposite effect. miR-20a-mediated down-regulation of
DUSP2 was shown to enhance the activity of several
angiogenic genes (Lin et al., 2012) and may promote the
increased vascularity associated with endometriosis (Hull
et al., 2003).

Functional studies of the selected miRNA in endometriosis.

Study

miRNA tested

Sample tested

Conclusion

Abe et al. (2013)

miR-96b

Endometriotic cyst cell cultures
versus normal endometrial stromal
cell cultures (8 patients, 8 controls)
Endometrioma versus eutopic
endometrium (12 patients, 12
controls)
Ectopic versus eutopic endometrium
(37 patients, 17 controls)

miR-96b inhibits proliferation and
induces apoptosis via c-myc and bcl-2
suppression in endometriosis
Increase in cell invasion, activation of
NFjB pathway, elevation of IL-8

miR-199a

Lin et al. (2012)

miR-20a

Petracco et al. (2011)

miR-135a/b

Ramon et al. (2011)

miR-125a, miR-222,
miR-17-5p

Hawkins et al. (2011b)

miR-29c

Eutopic endometrium (32 patients, 50
controls)
Endometrioma versus eutopic
endometrium (58 patients, 38
controls)
Endometrioma versus eutopic
endometrium (8 patients, 11
controls)

Up-regulation of angiogenic genes
and FGF-9, stimulation of
proliferation
Down-regulation of HOXA10 that
regulates endometrial receptivity
Lower expression of VEGF-A; higher
expression of the angiogenic inhibitor
TSP-1
miR-29c induces down-regulation of
COL7A1, TFAP2C and UPK1B

Green indicates down-regulated miRNA; red indicates up-regulated miRNA.COL7A1 = collagen type VII A1; FGF = fetal growth factor;
HOXA10 = homeobox A10; IL = interleukin; NFjB = nuclear factor kappa B; TFAP2C = transcription factor AP-2c; UPK1B = uroplakin 1B;
TSP = Thrombospondin; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

524
In contrast and consistent with the microarray findings of
Ohlsson Teague et al. (2009) and Filigheddu et al. (2010),
miR-20a was identified as being down-regulated in endometrioma (n = 58) when compared with eutopic endometrium
from women with endometriosis (n = 58) and from controls
(n = 38) when quantitative PCR assays were performed normalizing to RNU6B. Of the three up-regulated (miR-21, -125
and -222) and three down-regulated miRNA (miR-15b,
-17-5p and -20a) identified, a decrease in the pro-angiogenic
miR-17-5p was shown to correlate inversely with elevated
thrombospondin protein concentrations (an angiogenic factor) in endometrioma tissues. Conversely elevations in
miR-125a and miR-222 were associated with a decrease in
VEGF-A protein concentrations in endometriomas. Ramon
et al. (2011) concluded that miRNA could regulate angiogenic factors in a way that enhanced angiogenic activity in
endometriosis.
The miRNA regulation of other molecular pathways in
endometriosis has been explored. Dai et al. (2012) found
lower concentrations of miR-199a in 12 endometriotic tissues when compared with paired eutopic endometrium from
women with endometriosis and 12 eutopic endometrial samples from disease-free women, when reverse-transcription
PCR was performed and the data was normalized to U6.
The 30 -untranslated region of the IjB kinase B (IjjB) promoter was cloned into the luciferase reporter construct
and co-transfected with miR-199a or a noncoding mutant
sequence into primary endometrial stromal cell cultures.
The reduction in luciferase activity confirmed the ability
of miR-199a to directly down-regulate IjjB, and this was
substantiated by a reduction of IjjB protein. Il-8 production
and cell migration and invasion was suppressed in the
miR-199a-transfected cell cultures, suggesting that low
miR-199a concentrations in endometriotic tissues may promote disease progression and cell migration and invasion
via the NFjB pathway.
HOXA10 is a marker of endometrial receptivity that is
reduced in the eutopic endometrium from women with
endometriosis. Sex steroid regulation of HOXA10 appears
to be intact in endometriosis and Petracco et al. (2011)
explored the hypothesis that epigenetic regulation by
miR-135a and -135b altered HOXA10 expression in the
eutopic endometrium from women with endometriosis.
Both miR-135a and-135b were up-regulated in the proliferative phase and miR-135b concentrations were increased in
the secretory phase. A concomitant decrease in HOXA10
mRNA suggested direct regulation of this transcription factor by miR-135a/b, which was subsequently confirmed by
luciferase assay in endometrial stromal cells. Transfection
of endometrial stromal cells with miR-135a/b or their inhibitors repressed and enhanced HOXA10 mRNA and protein
concentrations respectively. It was concluded that
increased miR-135a/b repressive activity may result in
reduced HOXA10 mRNA and protein concentrations in eutopic endometrium from women with endometriosis thus
impairing implantation events.
Although, miRNA can be predicted to have an effect on
target mRNA translation and this effect can be experimentally validated in vitro, there are several additional factors
that determine the functional effect of a miRNA in vivo.
Each miRNA can regulate up to a hundred transcripts and
a target transcript can be regulated by a multitude of miRNA

M Louise Hull, V Nisenblat
so models of miRNA activity may be overly simple.
Some miRNA clusters with common mRNA targets are
co-transcribed, amplifying their repressive effect on translation. Furthermore, there are families of miRNA that have
extremely similar target profiles adding to the complexity of
in-vivo miRNA function. This complexity of regulation is
difficult to emulate in vitro and manipulable animal models
to test miRNA activity will need to be developed for endometriosis. Mouse models genetically deficient in specific
miRNA have been created (Blüml et al., 2011; Li et al.,
2010). Furthermore, miRNA mimics and antagonists have
been introduced into rodent and primate models in the
context of other diseases (Elmen et al., 2008a,b). These
models are starting to be utilized in endometriosis research
and are likely to lead to advances in understanding the role
of miRNA in endometriosis in the future.
In-silico models for miRNA activity in endometriotic
lesions have been formulated that indicate that miRNA
regulation is likely to control several processes in ectopic
endometrial development including attachment, inflammation, tissue remodelling, angiogenesis and fibrosis
(Ohlsson Teague et al., 2010). Further work is required
that experimentally validates the functional activity of
specific miRNA and their potential to alter the pathophysiology of endometriosis. It may be possible to alter miRNA
activity in endometriotic lesions to achieve a therapeutic
benefit for women with endometriosis with the use of synthetic or antagonistic miRNA. Translation to clinical
practice is likely to require the development of targeted
delivery systems to avoid unwanted on-target but offdisease side effects. Physiological miRNA transport mechanisms present in the human circulation could represent a
delivery system for inhibitors and enhancers of miRNA
activity.

Circulating miRNA and endometrial function
miRNA have been detected in all types of body fluids (Weber
et al., 2010) including the cell-free compartment of peripheral blood. Various diseases have been associated with signature serum or plasma miRNA concentrations; however,
the physiological role of these miRNA remains unclear. Initial evidence that circulating miRNA were passively released
from damaged cells (Wang et al., 2009) has been challenged
by observations of active secretion of miRNA from tissues or
cells. It is now thought that circulating miRNA can influence
gene transcription at distant target sites (Valadi et al.,
2007; Vickers et al., 2011). A model has been formulated
regarding the biogenesis and function of circulating miRNA
(Figure 1); however, the exact mechanisms by which miRNA
are released from donor cells and taken up by recipient cells
are the subject of ongoing investigation.
Global miRNA profiling in whole blood has been performed in healthy reproductive-age women and age-related
differences in miRNA plasma concentrations have been
demonstrated, although no attempt was made to determine
if cycle phase confounded the results (Sredni et al., 2011).
Similarly, none of the many studies that have explored circulating miRNA concentrations in a variety of pathological
conditions have accounted for the effect of menstrual cycle
phase on miRNA profiling in women of reproductive age.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

microRNA in endometrial disease
This information is of particular importance in biomarker
research, where the stage of the menstrual cycle in which
blood is drawn and the use of hormonal medications
might have a negative impact on the performance of a
miRNA-based test.
This study group recently profiled plasma miRNA concentrations in three different phases of the menstrual cycle in
eight healthy women and in eight women with endometriosis and did not demonstrate significant menstrual-phase
variations in plasma miRNA expression for any of 674
screened miRNA (Nisenblat et al., 2012). The data indicate
that the miRNA profile in reproductive-age women is disease
specific rather than cycle dependent. This implies that
plasma miRNA-based diagnostic tests in reproductive-age
women are likely to be accurate at any time in the menstrual cycle, although it is possible that small cycle-related
changes could be revealed in a larger study. This finding
does not contradict previous reports of cycle-dependent
miRNA patterns in endometrial cells and tissues, which have
higher local concentrations of oestradiol and progesterone
than the systemic circulation. Also, the study did not detect
cycle-phase differences that could identify the window of
implantation and, therefore, did not detect plasma miRNA
with potential as uterine receptivity markers. A better study
design to detect biomarkers for uterine receptivity would be
a comparison of plasma miRNA profiles from fertile women
with those from women with unexplained recurrent implantation failure.
Women with endometriosis have a range of systemic
health problems, including an increased risk of certain types
of cancer (Nezhat et al., 2008; Somigliana et al., 2006;
Swiersz, 2002; Van Gorp et al., 2004). A review of 11
case–control and cohort studies demonstrated a positive
relationship between endometriosis and ovarian cancer,
with all association entities (odd ratio, relative risk and
standardized incidence ratio) between 1.3 and 3.0 and all
confidence intervals above 1 with one exception (Somigliana
et al., 2006). A positive association was also identified
between endometriosis and breast cancer (association
entity 0.8–4.3 in 11 studies), melanoma (association entity
0.7–3.9 in nine studies) and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (association entity 1–1.8 in four studies).
There is also an association between a history of endometriosis and auto-immune, endocrine and atopic disorders
(Clauw and Chrousos, 1997; Sinaii et al., 2002), susceptibility to infection (Gemmill et al., 2010) and cardiovascular
disease (Mu et al., 2012; Santoro et al., 2012). In a
cross-sectional survey of 3680 women with endometriosis
who responded to a survey of women with surgically defined
endometriosis from the American Endometriosis Society,
the prevalence odds ratio was 20.7 (95% CI 14.3–29.9,
P < 0.0001) for systemic lupus erythematosus, 7.1 (95% CI
4.4–11.3, P < 0.0001) for multiple sclerosis, 1.5 (95% CI
1.2–1.9, P = 0.001) and for rheumatoid arthritis and 23.9
(95% CI 15.5–36.5, P  0.0001) for Sjögren’s syndrome,
when compared with the estimated prevalence in the general American female population (Sinaii et al., 2002). In
the same study, women with endometriosis had a prevalence odds ratio of 1.8 (95% CI 1.6–2.1, P  0.0001) for
fibromyalgia and 180.5 (95% CI 147.2–242.0, P  0.0001)
for chronic fatigue syndrome. Nisenblat et al. (2012) identified plasma miRNA signatures that are dysregulated in

525
women with endometriosis and postulated that they could
contribute to the aberrant systemic epiphenomena associated with endometriosis.
miRNA that differentiate women with and without
endometriotic disease have potential to be biomarkers that
could underpin the development of a noninvasive diagnostic
test for endometriosis. Wang et al. (2012a) identified 145
serum miRNA with a differential expression >2-fold and 61
with >10-fold difference, when a multiplex reversetranscription PCR analysis was performed using two pooled
samples from 10 endometriotic and 10 disease-free women
(Wang et al., 2012a); four miRNA, miR-199a, miR-122,
miR-145* and miR-542-3p, predicted endometriosis with
93.2% sensitivity and 96% specificity in a large retrospective
cohort of 60 endometriosis and 25 disease-free women
(Wang et al., 2012a). Similarly, Jia et al. (2012) performed
a similar miRNA TaqMan microarray analysis with three
plasma samples from women with endometriosis and three
from healthy women; 27 down-regulated miRNA were identified, but none overlapped with Wang’s diagnostic set of 4
miRNA. In a cohort of 23 women with endometriosis and 23
endometriosis free controls, miR-15b-5p, miR-17-5p,
miR-20a, miR-21, miR-22 and miR-26a displayed an area
under the receiver operating curve of between 0.79–0.87,
much higher than the area under the curve of 0.5 which is
expected by chance alone. Similar to Wang et al. (2012a),
the development and validation of the diagnostic value of
these biomarkers was in the same cohort rather than an
independent test cohort, which is not recommended by
the QUADAS guidelines for diagnostic test development
(Whiting et al., 2011). Nevertheless, both studies demonstrate the potential for plasma miRNA as biomarkers of
endometriotic disease.
The current study group utilized TaqMan arrays to identify differentially regulated miRNA in the plasma of eight
women with endometriosis and eight healthy controls at
three different cycle stages (47 total samples). Twelve
miRNA were differentially expressed with P value < 0.01
although only three remained significant after correction
for multiple testing (Nisenblat et al., 2012). miR-23a was
the only miRNA identified in any other study (Jia et al.,
2012). The inconsistency between studies could be due to
different laboratory-based methodologies or alternate
approaches to data normalization, which can lead to large
variations in microarray outcomes using the same dataset.
Nisenblat et al. (2012) was unable to replicate the findings
of Wang et al. (2012a) and Jia et al. (2012), which raises
the possibility of inherent differences in the sample population, either due to geographical divergence or from confounding factors such as disease location, disease severity
stage or smoking.
Further effort will be needed to determine whether circulating miRNA are reliable biomarkers for endometriosis,
and it will be particularly important to optimize experimental methods and workflow. Ultimately, large independent
cohorts are required to firstly develop a robust noninvasive
diagnostic test, then assess the sensitivity, specificity and
diagnostic accuracy of the test in an independent population in accordance with the QUADAS guidelines for diagnostic tests (Whiting et al., 2011). Confounding factors such as
age, disease stage and smoking will also need to be assessed
in subgroup analyses. International collaborations will

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

526
ultimately be required to determine if the test is able to be
applied to global populations.

Conclusion
Recurrent implantation failure, recurrent miscarriage and
endometriosis are conditions that are often diagnosed after
years of heartbreaking reproductive illness which currently
have limited therapeutic modalities. Large-scale miRNA
profiling studies have provided the first evidence that
miRNA contribute to these endometrial disorders, as well
as the physiological menstrual cycle changes in the endometrium. In-silico analyses have been able to predict biological
processes that these miRNA and their targets may influence,
and some functional studies have experimentally validated
miRNA/target mRNA interactions in endometrial cells. A
recent exciting advance has been the identification of
serum and plasma endometriosis-associated miRNA, raising
the possibility that these small molecules may mediate a
systemic interaction with non-endometrial cells at distant
sites and could have potential as components of noninvasive
diagnostic tests.
As knowledge of the function of miRNA in endometrial
disease increases, miRNA-based therapies for disorders of
implantation, placentation and endometriosis are likely to
become more realistic. At this stage, however, much more
work needs to be done to establish true biological role of
miRNA in endometrial disease, with a view to translating
this knowledge into clinically effective outcomes.

References
Abe, W., Nasu, K., Nakada, C., Kawano, Y., Moriyama, M.,
Narahara, H., 2013. MiR-196b targets c-myc and Bcl-2 expression, inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis in endometriotic stromal cells. Hum. Reprod. 28, 750–761.
Aghajanova, L., Giudice, L.C., 2011. Molecular evidence for
differences in endometrium in severe versus mild endometriosis.
Reprod. Sci. 18, 229–251.
Altmäe, S., Martinez-Conejero, J.A., Esteban, F.J., Ruiz-Alonso,
M., Stavreus-Evers, A., Horcajadas, J.A., Salumets, A., 2012a.
MicroRNAs miR-30b, miR-30d, and miR-494 Regulate Human
Endometrial Receptivity. Reprod. Sci. 20, 308–317.
Altmäe, S., Reimand, J., Hovatta, O., Zhang, P., Kere, J., Laisk,
T., Saare, M., Peters, M., Vilo, J., Stavreus-Evers, A., 2012b.
Research resource: interactome of human embryo implantation:
identification of gene expression pathways, regulation, and
integrated regulatory networks. Mol. Endocrinol. 26, 203–217.
Arroyo, J.D., Chevillet, J.R., Kroh, E.M., Ruf, I.K., Pritchard, C.C.,
Gibson, D.F., Mitchell, P.S., Bennett, C.F., Pogosova-Agadjanyan, E.L., Stirewalt, D.L., Tait, J.F., Tewari, M., 2011.
Argonaute2 complexes carry a population of circulating microRNAs independent of vesicles in human plasma. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 108, 5003–5008.
Banerjee, P., Jana, S.K., Pasricha, P., Ghosh, S., Chakravarty, B.,
Chaudhury, K., 2012. Proinflammatory cytokines induced altered
expression of cyclooxygenase-2 gene results in unreceptive
endometrium in women with idiopathic recurrent spontaneous
miscarriage. Fertil. Steril. 99, 179–187.
Bartel, D.P., 2004. MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism,
and function. Cell 116, 281–297.
Bartel, D.P., 2009. MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory
functions. Cell 136, 215–233.

M Louise Hull, V Nisenblat
Bhattacharyya, S.N., Habermacher, R., Martine, U., Closs, E.I.,
Filipowicz, W., 2006. Relief of microRNA-mediated translational
repression in human cells subjected to stress. Cell 125,
1111–1124.
Blüml, S., Bonelli, M., Niederreiter, B., Puchner, A., Mayr, G.,
Hayer, S., Koenders, M.I., van den Berg, W.B., Smolen, J.,
Redlich, K., 2011. Essential role of microRNA-155 in the
pathogenesis of autoimmune arthritis in mice. Arthritis Rheum.
63, 1281–1288.
Borthwick, J.M., Charnock-Jones, D.S., Tom, B.D., Hull, M.L.,
Teirney, R., Phillips, S.C., Smith, S.K., 2003. Determination of
the transcript profile of human endometrium. Mol. Hum.
Reprod. 9, 19–33.
Burney, R.O., Talbi, S., Hamilton, A.E., Vo, K.C., Nyegaard, M.,
Nezhat, C.R., Lessey, B.A., Giudice, L.C., 2007. Gene expression
analysis of endometrium reveals progesterone resistance and
candidate susceptibility genes in women with endometriosis.
Endocrinology 148, 3814–3826.
Burney, R.O., Hamilton, A.E., Aghajanova, L., Vo, K.C., Nezhat,
C.N., Lessey, B.A., Giudice, L.C., 2009. MicroRNA expression
profiling of eutopic secretory endometrium in women with
versus without endometriosis. Mol. Hum. Reprod. 15,
625–631.
Cakmak, H., Taylor, H.S., 2011. Implantation failure: molecular
mechanisms and clinical treatment. Hum. Reprod. Update 17,
242–253.
Carletti, M., Christenson, L., 2009. MicroRNA in the ovary and
female reproductive tract. J. Anim. Sci. 87, E29–E38.
Chakrabarty, A., Tranguch, S., Daikoku, T., Jensen, K., Furneaux,
H., Dey, S.K., 2007. MicroRNA regulation of cyclooxygenase-2
during embryo implantation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104,
15144–15149.
Chandana, E.P.S., Maeda, Y., Ueda, A., Kiyonari, H., Oshima, N.,
Yamamoto, M., Kondo, S., Oh, J., Takahashi, R., Yoshida, Y.,
2010. Involvement of the Reck tumor suppressor protein in
maternal and embryonic vascular remodeling in mice. BMC Dev.
Biol. 10, 84.
Choudhury, M., Friedman, J.E., 2012. Epigenetics and microRNAs
in preeclampsia. Clin. Exp. Hypertens. 34, 334–341.
Clauw, D., Chrousos, G., 1997. Chronic pain and fatigue syndromes: overlapping clinical and neuroendocrine features and
potential pathogenic mechanisms. Neuroimmunomodulation 4,
134–153.
Cochrane, D.R., Cittelly, D.M., Richer, J.K., 2011. Steroid receptors and microRNAs: relationships revealed. Steroids 76, 1–10.
Cortez, M.A., Bueso-Ramos, C., Ferdin, J., Lopez-Berestein, G.,
Sood, A.K., Calin, G.A., 2011. MicroRNAs in body fluids––the mix
of hormones and biomarkers. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 8, 467–477.
Dai, L., Gu, L., Di, W., 2012. MiR-199a attenuates endometrial
stromal cell invasiveness through suppression of the IKKbeta/NF-kappaB pathway and reduced interleukin-8 expression.
Mol. Hum. Reprod. 18, 136–145.
Dennis Jr., G., Sherman, B.T., Hosack, D.A., Yang, J., Gao, W.,
Lane, H.C., Lempicki, R.A., 2003. DAVID: database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery. Genome Biol. 4,
P3.
Elmen, J., Lindow, M., Schütz, S., Lawrence, M., Petri, A., Obad,
S., Lindholm, M., Hedtjärn, M., Hansen, H.F., Berger, U., 2008a.
LNA-mediated microRNA silencing in non-human primates.
Nature 452, 896–899.
Elmen, J., Lindow, M., Silahtaroglu, A., Bak, M., Christensen, M.,
Lind-Thomsen, A., Hedtjärn, M., Hansen, J.B., Hansen, H.F.,
Straarup, E.M., 2008b. Antagonism of microRNA-122 in mice by
systemically administered LNA-antimiR leads to up-regulation of
a large set of predicted target mRNAs in the liver. Nucleic Acids
Res. 36, 1153–1162.
Estella, C., Herrer, I., Moreno-Moya, J.M., Quiñonero, A., Martı́nez, S., Pellicer, A., Simón, C., 2012. MiRNA signature and dicer

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

microRNA in endometrial disease
requirement during human endometrial stromal decidualization
in vitro. PLoS One 7, e41080.
Filigheddu, N., Gregnanin, I., Porporato, P.E., Surico, D., Perego,
B., Galli, L., Patrignani, C., Graziani, A., Surico, N., 2010.
Differential expression of microRNAs between eutopic and
ectopic endometrium in ovarian endometriosis. J. Biomed.
Biotechnol. 2010, 369549.
Filipowicz, W., Bhattacharyya, S.N., Sonenberg, N., 2008. Mechanisms of post-transcriptional regulation by microRNAs: are the
answers in sight? Nat. Rev. Genet. 9, 102–114.
Flynt, A.S., Lai, E.C., 2008. Biological principles of microRNA-mediated regulation: shared themes amid diversity. Nat. Rev. Genet.
9, 831–842.
Gemmill, J.A.L., Stratton, P., Cleary, S.D., Ballweg, M.L., Sinaii,
N., 2010. Cancers, infections, and endocrine diseases in women
with endometriosis. Fertil. Steril. 94, 1627–1631.
Gilabert-Estelles, J., Braza-Boils, A., Ramon, L.A., Zorio, E.,
Medina, P., Espana, F., Estelles, A., 2012. Role of microRNAs in
gynecological pathology. Curr. Med. Chem. 19, 2406–2413.
Giudice, L.C., Kao, L.C., 2004. Endometriosis. Lancet 364,
1789–1799.
Giudice, L.C., Telles, T.L., Lobo, S., Kao, L., 2002. The molecular
basis for implantation failure in endometriosis. Ann. N. Y. Acad.
Sci. 955, 252–264.
Griffiths-Jones, S., Saini, H.K., van Dongen, S., Enright, A.J., 2008.
MiRBase: tools for microRNA genomics. Nucleic Acids Res. 36,
D154–D158.
Haouzi, D., Mahmoud, K., Fourar, M., Bendhaou, K., Dechaud, H.,
de Vos, J., Reme, T., Dewailly, D., Hamamah, S., 2009.
Identification of new biomarkers of human endometrial receptivity in the natural cycle. Hum. Reprod. 24, 198–205.
Harper, M.J.K., 1992. 10 The implantation window. Baillieres Clin.
Obstet. Gynaecol. 6, 351–371.
Hawkins, S.M., Buchold, G.M., Matzuk, M.M., 2011a. Minireview:
the roles of small RNA pathways in reproductive medicine. Mol.
Endocrinol. 25, 1257–1279.
Hawkins, S.M., Creighton, C.J., Han, D.Y., Zariff, A., Anderson,
M.L., Gunaratne, P.H., Matzuk, M.M., 2011b. Functional microRNA involved in endometriosis. Mol. Endocrinol. 25, 821–832.
Horcajadas, J., Pellicer, A., Simon, C., 2007. Wide genomic
analysis of human endometrial receptivity: new times, new
opportunities. Hum. Reprod. Update 13, 77–86.
Hossain, M., Salilew-Wondim, D., Schellander, K., Tesfaye, D.,
2012. The role of microRNAs in mammalian oocytes and
embryos. Anim. Reprod. Sci. 134, 36–44.
Hu, S.J., Ren, G., Liu, J.L., Zhao, Z.A., Yu, Y.S., Su, R.W., Ma,
X.H., Ni, H., Lei, W., Yang, Z.M., 2008. MicroRNA expression and
regulation in mouse uterus during embryo implantation. J. Biol.
Chem. 283, 23473–23484.
Hull, M.L., Charnock-Jones, D.S., Chan, C.L.K., Bruner-Tran, K.L.,
Osteen, K.G., Tom, B.D.M., Fan, T.P.D., Smith, S.K., 2003.
Antiangiogenic agents are effective inhibitors of endometriosis.
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 88, 2889–2899.
Hull, M., Escareno, C., Godsland, J., Doig, J., Johnson, C.,
Phillips, S., Smith, S., Tavaré, S., Print, C., Charnock-Jones,
D.S., 2008. Endometrial-peritoneal interactions during endometriotic lesion establishment. Am. J. Pathol. 173, 700–715.
Hunter, M.P., Ismail, N., Zhang, X., Aguda, B.D., Lee, E.J., Yu, L.,
Xiao, T., Schafer, J., Lee, M.L., Schmittgen, T.D., Nana-Sinkam,
S.P., Jarjoura, D., Marsh, C.B., 2008. Detection of microRNA
expression in human peripheral blood microvesicles. PLoS One 3,
e3694.
Iguchi, H., Kosaka, N., Ochiya, T., 2010. Secretory microRNAs as a
versatile communication tool. Commun. Integr. Biol. 3,
478–481.
Jia, S., Yang, Y., Lang, J., Sun, P., Leng, J., 2012. Plasma
miR-17-5p, miR-20a and miR-22 are down-regulated in women
with endometriosis. Hum. Reprod. 28, 322–330.

527
Jiang, X.H., Zhang, J.T., Chan, H.C., 2012. Ion channels/transporters as epigenetic regulators?––a microRNA perspective. Sci.
China Life Sci. 55, 753–760.
Klinge, C.M., 2012. MiRNAs and estrogen action. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 23, 223–233.
Koot, Y., Teklenburg, G., Salker, M., Brosens, J., Macklon, N.,
2012. Molecular aspects of implantation failure. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1822, 1943–1950.
Kosaka, N., Iguchi, H., Yoshioka, Y., Takeshita, F., Matsuki, Y.,
Ochiya, T., 2010. Secretory mechanisms and intercellular
transfer of microRNAs in living cells. J. Biol. Chem. 285,
17442–17452.
Kuokkanen, S., Chen, B., Ojalvo, L., Benard, L., Santoro, N.,
Pollard, J.W., 2010. Genomic profiling of microRNAs and
messenger RNAs reveals hormonal regulation in microRNA
expression in human endometrium. Biol. Reprod. 82, 791–801.
Lee, R.C., Ambros, V., 2001. An extensive class of small RNAs in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Sci. Signal. 294, 862.
Lee, R.C., Feinbaum, R.L., Ambros, V., 1993. The C. elegans
heterochronic gene lin-4 encodes small RNAs with antisense
complementarity to lin-14. Cell 75, 843–854.
Li, R., Qiao, J., Wang, L., Li, L., Zhen, X., Liu, P., Zheng, X.,
2011. MicroRNA array and microarray evaluation of endometrial receptivity in patients with high serum progesterone
levels on the day of hCG administration. Reprod. Biol.
Endocrinol. 9, 29.
Li, T., Morgan, M., Choksi, S., Zhang, Y., Kim, Y., 2010. Liu Zg.
MicroRNAs modulate the noncanonical transcription factor
NF-[kappa] B pathway by regulating expression of the kinase
IKK [alpha] during macrophage differentiation. Nat. Immunol.
11, 799–805.
Lin, S.C., Wang, C.C., Wu, M.H., Yang, S.H., Li, Y.H., Tsai, S.J.,
2012. Hypoxia-induced microRNA-20a expression increases ERK
phosphorylation and angiogenic gene expression in endometriotic stromal cells. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 97, e1515–e1523.
Macklon, N.S., Stouffer, R.L., Giudice, L.C., Fauser, B.C.J.M.,
2006. The science behind 25 years of ovarian stimulation for
in vitro fertilization. Endocr. Rev. 27, 170–207.
Miyaura, H., Iwata, M., 2002. Direct and indirect inhibition of Th1
development by progesterone and glucocorticoids. J. Immunol.
168, 1087–1094.
Mokhtar, N., Othman, R., Omar, M., Shan, L., Shafiee, M., Jamal,
R., 2012. Microarray profiling of secretory-phase endometrium
from patients with recurrent miscarriage. Reprod. Biol. 12,
183–199.
Morales Prieto, D.M., Markert, U.R., 2011. MicroRNAs in pregnancy. J. Reprod. Immunol. 88, 106–111.
Mu, F., Rich-Edwards, J., Rimm, E., Mukamal, K., Missmer, S.,
2012. A prospective study of endometriosis and coronary heart
disease risk. Fertil. Steril. 98, S67.
Munro, S., Farquhar, C., Mitchell, M., Ponnampalam, A., 2010.
Epigenetic regulation of endometrium during the menstrual
cycle. Mol. Hum. Reprod. 16, 297–310.
Nezhat, F., Datta, M.S., Hanson, V., Pejovic, T., Nezhat, C., 2008.
The relationship of endometriosis and ovarian malignancy: a
review. Fertil. Steril. 90, 1559–1570.
Nisenblat, V., Robertson, S., Evans, S., Hull, L., 2012. Plasma
miRNAS as non-invasive biomarkers for endometriosis. Fertil.
Steril. 98, S217–S218.
Nothnick, W.B., 2012. The role of micro-RNAs in the female
reproductive tract. Reproduction 143, 559–576.
Nothnick, W.B., Healy, C., 2010. Estrogen induces distinct
patterns of microRNA expression within the mouse uterus.
Reprod. Sci. 17, 987–994.
Nothnick, W.B., Healy, C., Hong, X., 2010. Steroidal regulation of
uterine miRNAs is associated with modulation of the miRNA
biogenesis components Exportin-5 and Dicer1. Endocrine 37,
265–273.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

528
Novakovic, B., Saffery, R., 2012. The ever growing complexity of
placental epigenetics––role in adverse pregnancy outcomes and
fetal programming. Placenta 33, 959–970.
Ohlsson Teague, E.M., van der Hoek, K.H., van der Hoek, M.B.,
Perry, N., Wagaarachchi, P., Robertson, S.A., Print, C.G., Hull,
L.M., 2009. MicroRNA-regulated pathways associated with endometriosis. Mol. Endocrinol. 23, 265–275.
Ohlsson Teague, E.M.C., Print, C.G., Hull, M.L., 2010. The role of
microRNAs in endometriosis and associated reproductive conditions. Hum. Reprod. Update 16, 142–165.
Pan, Q., Chegini, N., 2008. MicroRNA signature and regulatory
functions in the endometrium during normal and disease states.
Semin. Reprod. Med. 26, 479–493.
Pan, Q., Luo, X., Toloubeydokhti, T., Chegini, N., 2007. The
expression profile of micro-RNA in endometrium and endometriosis and the influence of ovarian steroids on their expression.
Mol. Hum. Reprod. 13, 797–806.
Pegtel, D.M., Cosmopoulos, K., Thorley-Lawson, D.A., van Eijndhoven, M.A., Hopmans, E.S., Lindenberg, J.L., de Gruijl, T.D.,
Wurdinger, T., Middeldorp, J.M., 2010. Functional delivery of
viral miRNAs via exosomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107,
6328–6333.
Petracco, R., Grechukhina, O., Popkhadze, S., Massasa, E., Zhou,
Y., Taylor, H.S., 2011. MicroRNA 135 regulates HOXA10 expression in endometriosis. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 96,
E1925–E1933.
Petracco, R.G., Kong, A., Grechukhina, O., Krikun, G., Taylor,
H.S., 2012. Global gene expression profiling of proliferative
phase endometrium reveals distinct functional subdivisions.
Reprod. Sci. 19, 1138–1145.
Popovici, R.M., Kao, L.C., Giudice, L.C., 2000. Discovery of new
inducible genes in in vitro decidualized human endometrial
stromal cells using microarray technology. Endocrinology 141,
3510–3515.
Pula, G., Perera, S., Prokopi, M., Sidibe, A., Boulanger, C.M.,
Mayr, M., 2008. Proteomic analysis of secretory proteins and
vesicles in vascular research. Proteomics Clin. Appl. 2, 882–891.
Qian, K., Hu, L., Chen, H., Li, H., Liu, N., Li, Y., Ai, J., Zhu, G.,
Tang, Z., Zhang, H., 2009. Hsa-miR-222 is involved in differentiation of endometrial stromal cells in vitro. Endocrinology 150,
4734–4743.
Quenby, S., Bates, M., Doig, T., Brewster, J., Lewis-Jones, D.,
Johnson, P., Vince, G., 1999. Pre-implantation endometrial
leukocytes in women with recurrent miscarriage. Hum. Reprod.
14, 2386–2391.
Ramon, L.A., Braza-Boils, A., Gilabert-Estelles, J., Gilabert, J.,
Espana, F., Chirivella, M., Estelles, A., 2011. MicroRNAs expression in endometriosis and their relation to angiogenic factors.
Hum. Reprod. 26, 1082–1090.
Revel, A., Achache, H., Stevens, J., Smith, Y., Reich, R., 2011.
MicroRNAs are associated with human embryo implantation
defects. Hum. Reprod. 26, 2830–2840.
Ruby, J.G., Jan, C.H., Bartel, D.P., 2007. Intronic microRNA
precursors that bypass Drosha processing. Nature 448, 83–86.
Salamonsen, L.A., Edgell, T.A., Rombauts, L.K., 2013. Assessing
receptivity in the endometrium: the need for a rapid, non-invasive test. Reprod. Biomed. Online 27, 486–496.
Sampson, J.A., 1927. Metastatic or embolic endometriosis, due to
the menstrual dissemination of endometrial tissue into the
venous circulation. Am. J. Pathol. 3, 93–110.
Santoro, L., D’onofrio, F., Campo, S., Ferraro, P.M., Tondi, P.,
Campo, V., Flex, A., Gasbarrini, A., Santoliquido, A., 2012.
Endothelial dysfunction but not increased carotid intima-media
thickness in young European women with endometriosis. Hum.
Reprod. 27, 1320–1326.
Sha, A.G., Liu, J.L., Jiang, X.M., Ren, J.Z., Ma, C.H., Lei, W., Su,
R.W., Yang, Z.M., 2011. Genome-wide identification of
micro-ribonucleic acids associated with human endometrial

M Louise Hull, V Nisenblat
receptivity in natural and stimulated cycles by deep sequencing.
Fertil. Steril. 96, 150–155.
Shulman, A., Ghetler, Y., Beyth, Y., Ben-Nun, I., 1996. The
significance of an early (premature) rise of plasma progesterone
in in vitro fertilization cycles induced by a ‘long protocol’ of
gonadotropin releasing hormone analogue and human menopausal gonadotropins. J. Assist. Reprod. Genet. 13, 207–211.
Sinaii, N., Cleary, S.D., Ballweg, M., Nieman, L.K., Stratton, P.,
2002. High rates of autoimmune and endocrine disorders,
fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome and atopic diseases
among women with endometriosis: a survey analysis. Hum.
Reprod. 17, 2715–2724.
Somigliana, E., Vigano, P., Parazzini, F., Stoppelli, S., Giambattista,
E., Vercellini, P., 2006. Association between endometriosis and
cancer: a comprehensive review and a critical analysis of clinical
and epidemiological evidence. Gynecol. Oncol. 101, 331–341.
Sredni, S.T., Gadd, S., Jafari, N., Huang, C.C., 2011. A parallel
study of mRNA and microRNA profiling of peripheral blood in
young adult women. Front. Genet. 2, 49–54.
Su, R.W., Lei, W., Liu, J.L., Zhang, Z.R., Jia, B., Feng, X.H., Ren,
G., Hu, S.J., Yang, Z.M., 2010. The integrative analysis of
microRNA and mRNA expression in mouse uterus under delayed
implantation and activation. PLoS One 5, e15513.
Sun, Y., Cai, J., Ma, F., Lü, P., Huang, H., Zhou, J., 2012. MiR-155
mediates suppressive effect of progesterone on TLR3, TLR4-triggered immune response. Immunol. Lett. 146, 25–30.
Swiersz, L., 2002. Role of endometriosis in cancer and tumor
development. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 955, 281–292.
Taylor, D.D., Gercel-Taylor, C., 2008. MicroRNA signatures of
tumor-derived exosomes as diagnostic biomarkers of ovarian
cancer. Gynecol. Oncol. 110, 13–21.
Taylor, H.S., Bagot, C., Kardana, A., Olive, D., Arici, A., 1999. HOX
gene expression is altered in the endometrium of women with
endometriosis. Hum. Reprod. 14, 1328–1331.
Toloubeydokhti, T., Pan, Q., Luo, X., Bukulmez, O., Chegini, N.,
2008. The expression and ovarian steroid regulation of endometrial micro-RNAs. Reprod. Sci. 15, 993–1001.
Turchinovich, A., Weiz, L., Langheinz, A., Burwinkel, B., 2011.
Characterization of extracellular circulating microRNA. Nucleic
Acids Res. 39, 7223–7233.
Valadi, H., Ekstrom, K., Bossios, A., Sjostrand, M., Lee, J.J.,
Lotvall, J.O., 2007. Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and
microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between
cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 9, 654–659.
Van Gorp, T., Amant, F., Neven, P., Vergote, I., Moerman, P.,
2004. Endometriosis and the development of malignant tumours
of the pelvis. A review of literature. Best Pract. Res. Clin.
Obstet. Gynaecol. 18, 349–371.
Vasudevan, S., Tong, Y., Steitz, J.A., 2007. Switching from
repression to activation: microRNAs can up-regulate translation.
Science 318, 1931–1934.
Vickers, K.C., Palmisano, B.T., Shoucri, B.M., Shamburek, R.D.,
Remaley, A.T., 2011. MicroRNAs are transported in plasma and
delivered to recipient cells by high-density lipoproteins. Nat.
Cell Biol. 13, 423–433.
Wang, W.T., Zhao, Y.N., Han, B.W., Hong, S.J., Chen, Y.Q.,
2012a. Circulating microRNAs identified in a genome-wide
serum microRNA expression analysis as noninvasive biomarkers for endometriosis. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 98,
281–289.
Wang, X., Li, B., Wang, J., Lei, J., Liu, C., Ma, Y., Zhao, H., 2012b.
Evidence that miR-133a causes recurrent spontaneous abortion
by reducing HLA-G expression. Reprod. Biomed. Online 25,
415–424.
Wang, K., Zhang, S., Marzolf, B., Troisch, P., Brightman, A., Hu,
Z., Hood, L.E., Galas, D.J., 2009. Circulating microRNAs,
potential biomarkers for drug-induced liver injury. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 4402–4407.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

microRNA in endometrial disease
Wang, K., Zhang, S., Weber, J., Baxter, D., Galas, D.J., 2010.
Export of microRNAs and microRNA-protective protein by mammalian cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, 7248–7259.
Weber, J.A., Baxter, D.H., Zhang, S., Huang, D.Y., Huang, K.H.,
Lee, M.J., Galas, D.J., Wang, K., 2010. The microRNA spectrum
in 12 body fluids. Clin. Chem. 56, 1733–1741.
Westholm, J.O., Lai, E.C., 2011. Mirtrons: microRNA biogenesis via
splicing. Biochimie 93, 1897.
Whiting, P.F., Rutjes, A., Westwood, M.E., Mallett, S., Deeks, J.J.,
Reitsma, J.B., Leeflang, M., Sterne, J., Bossuyt, P., 2011.
QUADAS-2: a revised tool for the quality assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies. Ann. Intern. Med. 155, 529.
Wu, M.Y., Ho, H.N., 2003. The role of cytokines in endometriosis.
Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 49, 285–296.
Xia, H.F., Jin, X.H., Song, P.P., Cui, Y., Liu, C.M., Ma, X., 2010.
Temporal and spatial regulation of miR-320 in the uterus
during embryo implantation in the rat. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 11,
719–730.

529
Yamagata, K., Fujiyama, S., Ito, S., Ueda, T., Murata, T., Naitou,
M., Takeyama, K., Minami, Y., O’malley, B.W., Kato, S., 2009.
Maturation of microRNA is hormonally regulated by a nuclear
receptor. Mol. Cell 36, 340–347.
Young, S.L., 2013. Oestrogen and progesterone action on endometrium: a translational approach to understanding endometrial
receptivity. Reprod. Biomed online 27, 497–505.
Zanatta, A., Rocha, A.M., Carvalho, F.M., Pereira, R.M.A., Taylor,
H.S., Motta, E.L.A., Baracat, E.C., Serafini, P.C., 2010. The role of
the Hoxa10/HOXA10 gene in the etiology of endometriosis and its
related infertility: a review. J. Assist. Reprod. Genet. 27, 701–710.
Declaration: The authors report no financial or commercial
conflicts of interest.
Received 29 January 2013; refereed 24 July 2013; accepted 30 July
2013.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

