Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 56 (2017) 127e132

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology
journal homepage: www.tjog-online.com

Review Article

Molecular regulation and role of angiogenesis in reproduction
Momchil Rizov a, Petya Andreeva b, Ivanka Dimova c, *
a

Medical Centre “ReproBioMed”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria
SAGBAL “Dr Shterev”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria
c
Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria
b

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 16 June 2016

Angiogenesis is an essential process for proper functioning of the female reproductive system and for
successful pregnancy realization. The multitude of factors required for physiological angiogenesis and the
complexity of regulation of their temporalespatial activities contribute to aberrations in human fertilization and pregnancy outcomes. In this study, we reviewed the current knowledge of the temporal
expression patterns, functions, and regulatory mechanisms of angiogenic factors during foliculogenesis,
early implantation/placentation and embryo development, as well as recurrent spontaneous abortions.
Angiogenic factors including vascular endothelial growth factors and angiopoietins have documented
roles in the development of primordial follicles into mature antral follicles. They also participate in
decidualization, which is accompanied by the creation of an extensive network of vessels in the stromal
bed that support the growth of the embryo and the placenta, and maintain early pregnancy. During
placentation angiogenic and angiomodulatory cytokines, T and B lymphocytes and macrophages affect
angiogenesis in a context-dependent manner. Defects in angiogenesis at the maternalefetal interface
contribute to miscarriage in humans. The establishment of more polymorphisms in the genes involved in
angiogenesis/vasculogenesis, and their pathological phenotype and expression could give opportunities
for prediction, creating a therapeutic strategy, and treatment of diseases related to female reproductive
health and problematic conception.
© 2017 Taiwan Association of Obstetrics & Gynecology. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Keywords:
angiogenesis in reproduction
angiopoietin-1 and angiopoietin-2
uterine endothelial cells
vascular endothelial growth factor

Introduction
Angiogenesis is strongly connected to the female reproductive
system and all its conditionsdfoliculogenesis, decidualization,
implantation, and embryo development. Similar to these, angiogenesis is a highly organized process of growth (cell proliferation)
and development (cell differentiation), whereby different molecules are involved, such as hormones, growth factors, receptors,
cytokines, and immune cells, as well as stem and progenitor cells.
Angiogenesis and main angiogenic factors
Blood vessels formation consist of two processes: vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. In the process of vasculogenesis, angioblasts form primitive vessels during embryonic development.
Capillary plexuses are the ﬁrst primitive and uniform vascular

* Corresponding author. Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University
Soﬁa, SBALAG “Maichin dom”, 2 Zdrave Street, 1431 Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
E-mail address: ivanka.i.dimova@gmail.com (I. Dimova).

structures, arising from mesoderm-derived endothelial precursors
and ﬁnally developing into hierarchically organized arteries, capillaries, and veins. In angiogenesis, new vessels are produced from
pre-existing ones [1]. Angiogenesis plays a crucial role in many
physiological and pathological situations such as wound healing,
tumor growth, adipositas, etc. [2].
Blood vessels supply all cells and tissues with oxygen (O2),
which is essential for their function, developmental processes, and
homeostasis. Rapidly dividing cells increase their O2 demand due to
the increased metabolism, which results in local hypoxia [3].
Hypoxia is the primary regulator of neoangiogenesis through the
activation of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a, a highly conserved
transcription factor that regulates a number of proangiogenic
genes, including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
angiopoietin (ANGPT)-1, ANGPT-2, Tunica interna endothelial cell
kinase-2 (Tie-2), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), basic
ﬁbroblast growth factor, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1.
Stimulation of the HIF pathway induces localized angiogenesis,
thus ensuring both short- and long-term adaptation to hypoxia.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tjog.2016.06.019
1028-4559/© 2017 Taiwan Association of Obstetrics & Gynecology. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

128

M. Rizov et al. / Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 56 (2017) 127e132

Various steps occur in angiogenesis from pre-existing blood
vessels. The most important factors, which induce angiogenesis,
are VEGF and basic ﬁbroblast growth factor. VEGF induces nitric
oxide and increases permeability of the pre-existing vessel,
causing vasodilatation. VEGF also stimulates the motility and
proliferation of endothelial cells, thus initiating the process of
capillary sprouting. After their migration to areas of tissue injury,
endothelial cells begin to proliferate. In the next step, endothelial
cell proliferation is inhibited and the formation of capillary tubes
starts. Finally, angiogenesis ends with the recruitment of periendothelial cells to build mature vesselsdpericytes for small
capillaries and smooth muscle cells for large vessels. The recruitment of pericytes, deposition of structural extracellular matrix
(ECM) proteins into the subendothelial basement membrane and
reduced endothelial cell proliferation promote vessel maturationdartery/vein differentiation, branching, and pruning [4].
PDGF, transforming growth factor beta, and ANGPT-1 and ANGPT2 are needed for vascular stabilization. The differentiation pattern
of the participating cells is strongly regulated both spatially and
transitionally.
ECM proteins participate in vessel sprouting, interacting with
integrin receptors on endothelial cells. Nonstructural ECM proteins
(e.g., plasminogen activator and matrix metalloproteinases)
destabilize celleECM interactions to save continued cell migration,
while other (e.g., thrombospondin and tenascin C) degrade the ECM
to permit ingrowth and remodeling of vessels [2].
As it was mentioned above, the driver of the angiogenesis is
hypoxia. It induces VEGF production, which then triggers a tyrosine
kinase pathway leading to the ﬁrst phases of angiogenesis [5]. This
pathway induces endothelial cell differentiation, proliferation, and
sprouting. Many further steps are required to direct endothelial
sprouts into functional, blood-carrying vessels. The generation of
the lumen and the beginning of blood ﬂow are accompanied by the
creation of new vascular connections and vessel stabilization [6].
Better oxygen delivery lowers local VEGF-A expression. Changes in
the local balance of activating and suppressing angiogenic factors
occur at this stage [7]. ANGPT-1 promotes stabilization of the
immature endothelial cell network by upregulation of CD31, and
vascular endothelial cadherin in endothelial cells. It also regulates
pericytes and smooth muscle cell growth and differentiation.
In summary, VEGF-A is a strong mitogenic factor that stimulates the proliferation and migration of vascular endothelial cells
for the creation and maintenance of vascular structures [8]. In
contrast, ANGPTs are not mitogenic, but they are fundamental to
the construction of vessels [9]. As an agonist to the Tie-2 receptor,
ANGPT-1 helps in maturation and maintaining of blood vessels by
recruiting periendothelial cells, whereas the endogenous antagonist ANGPT-2 assists in loosening the support cell framework to
allow for further vascular expansion [10]. The angiolytic (degenerative) effects of ANGPT-2 may become pronounced in the relative absence of VEGF [9].

Angiogenesis and ovarian function
Vascular system of ovaries differs from that of many other organs by creating and degenerating blood vessels in response to
physiological conditions, in particular the development of new
blood vessels from pre-existing ones to ensure the development of
growing follicles. Primordial follicles and early preantral follicles do
not have their own blood supply, but rely on blood vessels from the
surrounding stroma. In the process of development, growing follicles require formation of their individual blood supply. The process of angiogenesis is critical for the function of follicles, including
steroidogenesis and maturation of the oocyte, and is locally

regulated by angiogenic factors including VEGF (in particular VEGFA) and ANGPTs [11].
Folliculogenesis is the process of producing a single dominant
follicle from a pool of growing follicles in the cortex of the ovary and
involves four major regulatory events: recruitment, preantral follicle development, selection, and atresia. The two main types of
folliclesdpreantral (primordial, primary, secondary, and tertiary)
and antral (Graaﬁan, small, medium, large, and preovulatory)dare
gonadotropin independent and gonadotropin dependent, respectively. Recruitment, the ﬁrst major event in folliculogenesis, occurs
in primordial follicles nearest the ovarian medulla where blood
vessels are prominent. It seems that exposure to nutrients or bloodborne regulatory molecules plays a role in the control of recruitment. The cuboidal granulosa cells around the oocyte change their
shape and begin to express follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) receptors [12]. FSH-induced changes occur in response to abnormally
high levels of plasma FSH, because there are blood vessels in the
vicinity. The transition from a primary to a secondary follicle includes the acquisition of a second layer of granulosa cells and is
made by the continuing division of the granulosa cells. Most
importantly, the development of a secondary follicle is a characteristic of the acquisition of a theca layer. The tissue is consisting of
a layer of stroma-like cells around the basal lamina, and is subsequently differentiated into the inner theca interna and outer theca
externa. Theca development is accompanied by the neoformation
of numerous small vessels, by means of angiogenesis. The outer
layer of stroma cells in the theca externa is differentiated into
smooth muscle cells innervated by the autonomic nervous system.
The theca interna is highly vascularized and serves to deliver hormones (e.g., FSH and luteinizing hormone LH), nutrient molecules,
vitamins, and cofactors required for the growth and differentiation
of the oocyte and granulosa cells [13].
It was shown that VEGF is expressed in the theca cells of antral
follicles and in the granulosa cells nearest the oocyte in preantral
follicle, but not in granulosa cells of primordial and primary follicles. After in vitro culture, VEGF caused a decrease in the number of
primordial follicles and a concomitant increase in the number of
primary follicles that showed growth initiation and reached the
secondary and preantral stages of development after 7 days and 14
days, respectively. Follicular viability was also improved in the
presence of VEGF after 7 days and 14 days in culture [13]. The
growing follicles produce signiﬁcant quantities of VEGF-A and
ANGPT-2, but not ANGPT-1, especially after antrum formation.
VEGF production by slow-growing follicles was inﬂuenced by FSH
concentration and O2 tension [14]. The production of VEGF is
related to the stage of follicle growth (antrum formation), but the
magnitude of VEGF production is inﬂuenced by follicle size and
activity [15]. In slow-growing follicles, it increased with the
decrease of O2 concentration, from the typical tissue culture milieu
(20%) to concentrations commonly found in vascularized tissues
(5%), in the presence of a high/mid dose of FSH. The current data
extend the evidence that hypoxic-to-normoxic (0e5%) O2 concentrations promote VEGF production by luteinizing granulosa cells
collected from women during controlled ovarian stimulation cycles
or from dispersed luteal cells from monkeys or women [16]. In
contrast to slow-growing follicles, VEGF production by fastgrowing follicles (the tertiary or large preovulatory follicle) is independent of gonadotropins [17] and O2 [18].
VEGF promotes follicular development and steroidogenic function by an angiogenic or angiotropic action, as is evident from
in vivo studies [19e23]. There is also increasing evidence that VEGF
has extravascular effects in the ovary [8,23,24]. It is worthy to
investigate other than vascular (extravascular) actions of VEGF in
the growing follicle, to provide information about VEGF as a
possible marker for high-quality follicles destined to provide a

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

M. Rizov et al. / Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 56 (2017) 127e132

mature oocyte capable of fertilization. Except for VEGF, the other
important angiogenic factor in ovarian folliculogenesis, suggested
from the studies in rodent [25], bovine [26], and monkey [27], is
ANGPT-1 since its mRNA and protein expression increase in antral
follicles. The high ANGPT-2:ANGPT-1 ratio in developing follicles
in vitro was found in a granulosa cell study, where nonluteinized
cells produced more ANGPT-2 than ANGPT-1 during a short-term
culture. There is also evidence of similar characteristics in the
follicular ﬂuid of “lead” follicles from controlled ovarian stimulation protocols in women [28,29].
Another important angiogenic factor for human follicle development is PDGF. Pinkas et al [30]detected PDGF-A and PDGF-B
protein expression in oocytes and granulosa cells and PDGFR-b in
granulosa cells from primary follicles. They assumed that binding of
PDGF ligands to their receptors acts as a signaling factor that triggers
the activation of primordial follicles. Thе study of Pascuali et al [31]
demonstrated that inhibition of PDGF signaling by local injection of
a selective PDGFR inhibitor under the bursa of the rat ovary affects
follicular development and steroid hormone concentrations by
decreasing blood vessel formation and stability in the ovaries.
In summary, folliculogenesis, i.e., the development of primordial
follicles into mature, antral follicles, requires the creation of a
vascular network in the follicle wall. Angiogenic factors including
VEGFs, PDGFs, and ANGPTs have documented roles in this process.
The concentration of angiogenic factors, similar to other local factors [e.g., anti-Müllerian hormone and steroid hormones (progesterone, androstenedione, and estradiol)] [15,32,33] is inﬂuenced by
the follicle growth rate.
Angiogenesis is a critical process not only for follicular growth,
but also for ovulation and corpus luteum development and function
[11]. During the folliculareluteal transition, there is a dramatic increase in the expression of ﬁbroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), which
occurs in the context of already high levels of VEGF-A. It is a period
of intense angiogenesis, since the rupture of basement membrane
after ovulation allows endothelial cells and pericytes to migrate and
vascularize the luteinizing granulosa cells. Increased blood ﬂow
and vasodilation are characteristic events in periovulatory follicle,
but in the same time upregulation of HIF-1a was detected. It was
assumed that luteinizing hormone surge and human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) are stimulators of the HIF pathway in this
situation instead of hypoxia [34]. Matrix metalloprotease (MMP)
family members are highly activated after basement membrane
breakdown in ovulation, and it was shown that the administration
of an anti-MMP2 antibody to preovulatory follicles disrupted the
luteal tissue making it vascular deﬁcient [35]. The most prominent
feature of luteal angiogenesis is extensive tissue remodeling with a
valuable role of pericytes in vessel stabilization.
Angiogenesis and decidualization
In the initiation of pregnancy, maternal uterine blood vessel
formation is a basic event for developing embryo. The process is
preceded by decidualizationdaround the attached blastocyst it is a
formation of a primary and a secondary decidual zone, important for
providing a source of growth factors and cytokines for embryo
development up to Day 10.5 of gestation. Decidualization is a process of differentiation and tissue remodeling. It is determined in the
late secretory phase of each menstrual cycle following ovulation.
Decidual cells are modiﬁed stromal cells harboring unique
biochemical and cellular properties that allow them to support
embryo implantation. The steroid hormones estrogen and progesterone are critical for the regulation of processes in human endometrium. The action of the steroid hormones are mediated by
intracellular estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor proteins,
which are nuclear transcription factors binding to speciﬁc DNA

129

response elements in the promoters of target genes. Critical to this is
the endometrial expression of several genes closely related to
angiogenesis. Decidualization is accompanied by the creation of an
extensive network of vessels in the stromal bed that supports the
growth of the embryo and the placenta, and maintains early pregnancy. In the study of Laws et al, the expression of connexin 43
(Cx43), which is a major gap junction protein, was enhanced in
response to estrogen in the uterine stromal cells that surround the
implanted embryo during the early stages of pregnancy [36]. Once
the gap junctions are formed, signaling molecules may pass from the
donor to the recipient stromal cells via these connections. These
regulatory molecules, which may include second messengers such
as cyclic nucleotides, calcium ions, or prostaglandins, are likely to
impact the gene expression of recipient stromal cells, changing their
ability to produce VEGF, ANGPT-1, ANGPT-2, and possibly other
paracrine angiogenic effectors. Lack of the Cx43 gene in the stromal
cells led to a striking impairment in the development of new blood
vessels within the stromal compartment, resulting in the arrest of
embryo growth and early pregnancy loss. Further analysis of this
phenotypical defect revealed that loss of Cx43 expression resulted in
aberrant differentiation of uterine stromal cells and impaired production of several key angiogenic factors, including the VEGF. One of
the earliest signs of the uterine response to its angiogenic stimulus is
an increase in microvascular permeability at the sites of implantation [37]. VEGF inﬂuences the proliferation and function of uterine
endothelial cells in the mesometrial region of the pregnant uterus
where neovascularization mostly occurs.
The hCG (choriongonadotropin) is another important hormone
during pregnancy, and it has a large number of effects on uterine
receptivity [38]. Apart from the classic effects of hCG in the female
reproductive system, there is growing evidence that hCG can
induce angiogenesis [39,3]. These studies have shown that hCG is
able to induce neovascular activity in several in vivo assays [38,39].
Uterine vascular endothelial cells express functional luteinizing
hormone/hCG receptors. The hCG can have direct effect on endothelial cells to induce proliferation in some [38], but not all [39],
in vitro assays and can promote migration and in vitro tube formation [39]. In vivo, the mechanism of hCG-induced angiogenesis
increased by inducing VEGF expression in endometrial epithelial
cells and/or directly from trophoblast.
Angiogenesis in placentation and embryo development
Many moleculesdproteases, metabolites, ions, growth factors,
matrix proteins, cytokinesdas well as mechanical forces are
involved in positive or negative regulation of the processes of
angiogenesis/vasculogenesis. Trophoblast forms the interface between fetal and maternal tissues, and it is a rich source of angiogenic growth factors [26]. At approximately Day 21, in human
placentae, chorionic villi are developed and subsequently become
vascularized via pluripotent mesenchymal precursor cells (vasculogenesis) [10]. Other cells contribute to the vascularization in early
pregnancy as well. These are uterine natural killer cells. They are
recruited to the endometrium during the transition of endometrial
secretory phase and support the deciduas [24]. The main function
of uterine natural killer cells is the secretion of cytokines that assist
in successful implantation and placental development [29]. Many
of those cytokines direct angiogenesis during early pregnancy and
inﬂuence spiral arteriole modiﬁcations later in pregnancy [29].
Such angiogenic and angiomodulatory cytokines are ANGPT-1 and
ANGPT-2, placental growth factor, VEGF-C, interleukin (IL)-18, and
interferon-g [29]. T and B lymphocytes (and macrophages) surround the embryo after implantation and secrete cytokines [21],
such as tumor necrosis factor-a, a proinﬂammatory cytokine that
affects angiogenesis in a context-dependent manner [21]. Tumor

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

130

M. Rizov et al. / Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 56 (2017) 127e132

necrosis factor-a upregulates VEGF production in ﬁrst-trimester
trophoblast, and therefore may indirectly modulate placental
vascular permeability and angiogenesis [33]. The secretion of Th2
cytokines (e.g., IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-13) by T lymphocytes
leads to the release of human placental lactogen and hCG from
trophoblast [19]. IL-6 is a proangiogenic cytokine, while IL-4 may
have a positive or negative effect on endothelial cell function [40].
During implantation, the balance of immune cytokine production
between mother and fetus determines successful pregnancy, the
so-called decidual cytokine proﬁle. Macrophages are normal components of the endometrium, and their numbers increase in
response to pregnancy. A wide variety of macrophages, known as
Hofbauer cells, are found in the placenta. These cells express
angiogenic growth factors such as VEGF [3] and IL-17 [41], among
others. Macrophages can also inhibit angiogenesis through secretion of antiangiogenic mediators, such as a soluble variant of the
VEGF receptor-1 (sVEGFR-1 or sﬂt-1), which may play an important
role in pregnancy loss [42].
It is known that defects in angiogenesis at the maternalefetal
interface contribute to miscarriage in humans. The expression of
trophoblastic VEGF was found lower in 8e9 weeks of gestation in
samples from idiopathic recurrent spontaneous abortions
compared with samples of gestational age-matched elective terminations [1]. In addition, decidual endothelial cells of recurrent
abortion samples expressed quantitatively fewer receptors for VEGF
and ANGPTs [1]. One of the roles for FGF2 in vascular development of
the human placenta is also likely. FGF2 mRNA expression is high in
syncytiotrophoblast and cytotrophoblast of ﬁrst-trimester human
placenta, and FGF2 gene expression is greater in the ﬁrst trimester
than in the term placenta, suggesting a developmental control of its
expression. Examples have been shown that FGF2 is released by
human embryos as well as in gilts. During early human pregnancy,
ANGPT-1 mRNA and ANGPT-2 mRNA/protein are also expressed in
the syncytiotrophoblast [28], and there is evidence that ANGPT-2
mRNA and protein expression also occur in invasive cytotrophoblast [43]. The ANGPT receptors, Tie-1 and Tie-2, have almost
exclusive expression on endothelial cells in humans and other primate species [44]. ANGPT-1 and ANGPT-2 serve as functional antagonists, because they compete for Tie-2 receptor binding. ANGPT1 binding to Tie-2 promotes vascular maturation by recruiting periendothelial supportive cells, while ANGPT-2 binding leads to
destabilization of blood vessels, allowing initiation of neovascularization [45]. Fluctuations in ANGPT-1/ANGPT-2 protein ratios can change the angiogenic response. The importance of the
ANGPTs and their receptors in vascularization in general has
prompted studies into their aberrant expression levels in human
miscarriage. Compared with gestational age-matched control tissue, there is a reduced expression of the receptors Tie-1 and Tie-2
from endometrial vascular endothelia in recurrent miscarriage
and a low expression of Tie-1 in the trophoblast. There are no data
for the correlation between ANGPT-2 gene polymorphisms and
recurrent miscarriages in humans [44]. With recent advances in the
placental/uterine localization of the ANGPT/Tie-2 receptor axis,
further clinical studies are necessary to determine its potential role
to modulate vascularity associated with early implantation.
Clinical perspectives
The establishment of more polymorphisms in the genes
involved in angiogenesis/vasculogenesis, and their pathological
phenotype and expression could give opportunities for prediction,
creating a therapeutic strategy and treatment of diseases related to
female reproductive health and problematic conception.
There are numerous studies on the role of several genetic polymorphisms in VEGF-A, relating to various cancer diseases, diabetic

retinopathy [46], lateral sclerosis [47], and others. Polymorphisms in
VEGF genes are often associated with tumor angiogenesis. Several
single-nucleotide polymorphisms, such as þ405 C/G, e1154 G/A,
e634 G/C in 50 untranslated region and þ936 C/T, located in the 30
untranslated region of the VEGF-A gene are often associated with
different expression of the VEGF gene. This can lead to pathological
angiogenesis in progressively growing tumor formations, diseases
of the cardiovascular system, psoriasis, and others [48,49].
Various studies have been conducted on polymorphisms (þ405
G/C, þ936 C/T) in the gene for VEGF and their association with
endometriosis, recurrent implantation failure, spontaneous abortion
in assisted reproduction, and pathologies associated with the female
reproductive health [50e52]. Modern methods of analysis of known
point mutations in the human genome, called single-nucleotide
polymorphisms, are based on the speciﬁc ampliﬁcation of a region
of the genome to be tested by classic polymerase chain reaction,
followed by restriction analysis (restriction fragment length polymorphism RFLP) or sequencing, or by real-time polymerase chain
reaction, expression analyses, and next generation sequencing.
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) is a severe and
potentially life-threatening iatrogenic complication due to
controlled ovarian stimulation during assisted reproductive technology. This condition is characterized by a broad spectrum of
clinical manifestations. The levels of VEGF and its receptor VEGFR2
correlate with the severity of OHSS. The severe forms registered
tense ascites, hemodynamic instability, renal failure, respiratory
distress syndrome, hemorrhage from ovarian rupture, and thromboembolism. Recent data also suggest that hCG increases the
expression of VEGF/VEGFR2 in human granulosa cells and raises
serum VEGF-A [53]. Pregnant patients with OHSS must be monitored very closely because of the increased risk of deterioration due
to the rapidly rising serum concentrations of hCG. Many authors
globally indicate VEGF-A þ405 G/C as well as other polymorphisms
in the gene as a key factor for the development of OHSS. Serum
levels of VEGF-A are regarded as one of the main predictors of
OHSS. Probably many other factors take part, directly or indirectly
through VEGF, including angiotensin II, insulin-like growth factor 1,
transforming growth factor, PDGF, IL-1, IL-6, and others [54].
Different polymorphisms and mutations in the VEGF gene itself
would be reliable biological markers for an ovarian stimulation
approach. In-depth studies would provide clarity and predictability
for the opportunity to develop its adequate therapeutic management without endangering the patient's life.
Conclusion
It remains to be characterized whether single gene defects
contribute to aberrations in human pregnancy outcomes. The
multitude of factors required for physiological angiogenesis and the
complexity of regulation of their temporalespatial activities suggest that more than one factor may be required for the robust
angiogenesis associated with successful early pregnancy. Many of
the factors could also play critical roles in developmental angiogenesis/vasculogenesis within the embryo proper. Clearly, the
complexities of both of these systems are likely to contribute to the
high embryo mortality that occurs in human pregnancy. Increased
knowledge of the temporal expression patterns, functions, and
regulatory mechanisms of angiogenic factors during early implantation/placentation will enable novel therapeutic advances to be
made for some forms of human implantation failure and recurrent
spontaneous abortion.
Conﬂict of Interest
None.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

M. Rizov et al. / Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 56 (2017) 127e132

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by SCOPES (grant no. IZ73Z0_152454/
1), SNSF, Switzerland.

[25]

[26]

References
[27]
[1] Carmeliet P. Mechanisms of angiogenesis and arteriogenesis. Nat Med 2000;6:
389e95.
[2] Kumar V, Abbas AK, Fausto N, Mitchell R. Robbins basic pathology. 8th ed.
PAPERBACK Edition; 2007.
[3] Fong GH. Mechanisms of adaptive angiogenesis to tissue hypoxia. Angiogenesis 2008;11:121e40.
[4] Kumar TR, Wang Y, Lu N, Matzuk MM. Follicle stimulating hormone is
required for ovarian follicle maturation but not male fertility. Nat Genet
1997;15:201e4.
[5] Folkman J. Fundamental concepts of the angiogenic process. Curr Mol Med
2003;3:643e51.
[6] Lubarsky B, Krasnow MA. Tube morphogenesis: making and shaping biological tubes. Cell 2003;112:19e28.
[7] Adams RH, Alitalo K. Molecular regulation of angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007;8:464e78.
[8] Araújo VR, Duarte AB, Bruno JB, Pinho Lopes CA, de Figueiredo JR. Importance
of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in ovarian physiology of mammals. Zygote 2013;21:295e304.
[9] Fearnley GW. Vascular endothelial growth factor A-stimulated signaling
from endosomes in primary endothelial cells. Methods Enzymol 2014;535:
265e92.
[10] Hazzard TM, Stouffer RL. Angiogenesis in ovarian follicular and luteal development. Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2000;14:883e900.
[11] Robinson RS, Woad KJ, Hammond AJ, Laird M, Hunter MG, Mann GE.
Angiogenesis and vascular function in the ovary. Reproduction 2009;138:
869e81.
[12] Jones RE. The female reproductive system. Hum Reprod Biol 2006;612:31e3.
[13] Abdel-Ghani MA, Shimizu T, Suzuki H. Expression pattern of vascular endothelial growth factor in canine folliculogenesis and its effect on the growth
and development of follicles after ovarian organ culture. Reprod Domest Anim
2014;49:734e9.
[14] Xu J, Bernuci MP, Lawson MS, Yeoman RR, Fisher TE, Zelinski MB, et al. Survival, growth, and maturation of secondary follicles from prepubertal, young,
and older adult rhesus monkeys during encapsulated three-dimensional
culture: effects of gonadotropins and insulin. Reproduction 2010;140:
685e97.
[15] Fisher TE, Molskness TA, Villeda A, Zelinski MB, Stouffer RL, Xu J. Vascular
endothelial growth factor and angiopoietin production by primate follicles
during culture is a function of growth rate, gonadotrophin exposure and
oxygen milieu. Hum Reprod 2013;28:3263e70.
[16] Tesone M, Stouffer RL, Borman SM, Hennebold JD, Molskness TA. Vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production by the monkey corpus luteum
during the menstrual cycle: isoform-selective messenger RNA expression
in vivo and hypoxia-regulated protein secretion in vitro. Biol Reprod 2005;73:
927e34.
[17] Taylor PD, Hillier SG, Fraser HM. Effects of GnRH antagonist treatment on
follicular development and angiogenesis in the primate ovary. J Endocrinol
2004;183:1e17.
[18] Martinez-Chequer JC. Insulin-like growth factors-1 and -2, but not hypoxia,
synergize with gonadotropin hormone to promote vascular endothelial
growth factor-A secretion by monkey granulosa cells from preovulatory follicles. Biol Reprod 2003;68:1112e8.
[19] Zimmermann RC, Xiao E, Husami N, Sauer MV, Lobo R, Kitajewski J, et al.
Short-term administration of antivascular endothelial growth factor antibody
in the late follicular phase delays follicular development in the rhesus monkey. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;86:768e72.
[20] Zimmermann RC, Xiao E, Bohlen P, Ferin M. Administration of antivascular
endothelial growth factor receptor 2 antibody in the early follicular phase
delays follicular selection and development in the rhesus monkey. Endocrinology 2002;14:2496e502.
[21] Wulff C, Wilson H, Wiegand SJ, Rudge JS, Fraser HM. Prevention of thecal
angiogenesis, antral follicular growth, and ovulation in the primate by treatment with vascular endothelial growth factor Trap R1R2. Endocrinology
2002;143:2797e807.
[22] Celik-Ozenci C, Akkoyunlu G, Kayisli UA, Arici A, Demir R. Localization of
vascular endothelial growth factor in the zona pellucida of developing ovarian
follicles in the rat: a possible role in destiny of follicles. Histochem Cell Biol
2003;120:383e90.
[23] Roberts AE, Arbogast LK, Friedman CI, Cohn DE, Kaumaya PT, Danforth DR.
Neutralization of endogenous vascular endothelial growth factor depletes
primordial follicles in the mouse ovary. Biol Reprod 2007;76:218e23.
[24] Greenaway J, Connor K, Pedersen HG, Coomber BL, LaMarre J, Petrik J. Vascular
endothelial growth factor and its receptor, Flk-1/KDR, are cytoprotective in

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]
[41]
[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]
[48]
[49]

131

the extravascular compartment of the ovarian follicle. Endocrinology
2004;145:2896e905.
Abramovich D, Rodriguez Celin A, Hernandez F, Tesone M, Parborell F.
Spatiotemporal analysis of the protein expression of angiogenic factors and
their related receptors during folliculogenesis in rats with and without hormonal treatment. Reproduction 2009;137:309e20.
Hayashi KG, Berisha B, Matsui M, Schams D, Miyamoto A. Expression of mRNA
for the angiopoietin-tie system in granulosa cells during follicular development in cows. J Reprod Dev 2004;50:477e80.
Wulff C, Wiegand SJ, Saunders PT, Scobie GA, Fraser HM. Angiogenesis during
follicular development in the primate and its inhibition by treatment with
truncated Flt-1-Fc (vascular endothelial growth factor Trap). Endocrinology
2001;142:3244e54.
Hurliman AK, Speroff L, Stouffer RL, Patton PE, Lee A, Molskness TA. Changes
in circulating levels and ratios of angiopoietins during pregnancy but not
during the menstrual cycle and controlled ovarian stimulation. Fertil Steril
2010;93:1493e9.
Nishigaki A, Okada H, Tsuzuki T, Cho H, Yasuda K, Kanzaki H. Angiopoietin 1
and angiopoietin 2 in follicular ﬂuid of women undergoing a long protocol.
Fertil Steril 2011;96:1378e83.
Pinkas H, Fisch B, Rozansky G, Felz C, Kessler-Icekson G, Krissi H, et al.
Platelet-derived growth factors (PDGF-A and -B) and their receptors in human
fetal and adult ovaries. Mol Hum Reprod 2008;14:199e206.
Pascuali N, Scotti L, Abramovich D, Irusta G, Di Pietro M, Bas D, et al. Inhibition
of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor affects follicular development and ovarian proliferation, apoptosis and angiogenesis in prepubertal
eCG-treated rats. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2015;412:148e58.
Xu J, Lawson MS, Yeoman RR, Pau KY, Barrett SL, Zelinski MB, et al. Secondary
follicle growth and oocyte maturation during encapsulated three-dimensional
culture in rhesus monkeys: effects of gonadotrophins, oxygen and fetuin.
Hum Reprod 2011;26:1061e72.
Xu J, Lawson MS, Yeoman RR, Molskness TA, Ting AY, Stouffer RL, et al.
Fibrin promotes development and function of macaque primary follicles
during encapsulated three-dimensional culture. Hum Reprod 2013;28:
2187e200.
van den Driesche S, Myers M, Gay E, Thong KJ, Duncan WC. HCG up-regulates
hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha in luteinized granulosa cells: implications for
the hormonal regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor A in the human
corpus luteum. Mol Hum Reprod 2008;14:455e64.
Gottsch ML, Van Kirk EA, Murdoch WJ. Role of matrix metalloproteinase 2 in
the ovulatory folliculoeluteal transition of ewes. Reproduction 2002;124:
347e52.
Laws MJ, Taylor RN, Sidell N, DeMayo FJ, Lydon JP, Gutstein DE, Bagchi MK,
Bagchi IC. Gap junction communication between uterine stromal cells plays a
critical role in pregnancy-associated neovascularization and embryo survival.
Development 2008;135(15):2659e68.
Rockwell LC. Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor/vascular
permeability factor action blocks estrogen-induced uterine edema and implantation in rodents. Biol Reprod 2002;67:1804e10.
Tesarik J, Hazout A, Mendoza C. Luteinizing hormone affects uterine receptivity independently of ovarian function. Reprod Biomed Online 2003;7:
59e64.
queux C, Lorquet S, Munaut C, et al.
Berndt S, d'Hauterive SP, Blacher S, Pe
Angiogenic activity of human chorionic gonadotropin through LH receptor
activation on endothelial and epithelial cells of the endometrium. FASEB J
2006;20:2630e2.
Naldini A, Pucci A, Bernini C, Carraro F. Regulation of angiogenesis by Th1- and
Th2-type cytokines. Curr Pharm Des 2003;9:511e9.
Pongcharoen S, Somran J, Sritippayawan S. Interleukin-17 expression in the
human placenta. Placenta 2007;28:59e63.
Girardi G, Yarilin D, Thurman JM, Holers VM, Salmon JE. Complement activation induces dysregulation of angiogenic factors and causes fetal rejection
and growth restriction. J Exp Med 2006;203:2165e75.
Hess AP, Hirchenhain J, Schanz A, Talbi S, Hamilton AE, Giudice LC, et al.
Angiopoietin-1 and -2 mRNA and protein expression in mouse preimplantation embryos and uteri suggests a role in angiogenesis during implantation.
Reprod Fertil Dev 2006;18:509e16.
Torry DS, Leavenworth J, Chang M, Maheshwari V, Groesch K, Ball ER, Torry RJ.
Angiogenesis in implantation. Journal of assisted reproduction and genetics
2007;24(7):303e15.
Asahara T, Chen D, Takahashi T, Fujikawa K, Kearney M, Magner M, et al. Tie2
receptor ligands, angiopoietin-1 and angiopoietin-2, modulate VEGF-induced
postnatal neovascularization. Circ Res 1998;83:233e40.
Ray D, Mishra M, Ralph S, Read I, Davies R, Brenchley P. Association of the
VEGF gene with proliferative diabetic retinopathy but not proteinuria in
diabetes. Diabetes 2004;53:861e4.
Achache H, Revel A. Endometrial receptivity markers, the journey to successful embryo implantation. Hum Reprod Update 2006;12:731e46.
Roskoski R. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling in tumor
progression. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2007;62:179e213.
Qi M, Huang X, Zhou L, Zhang J. Four polymorphisms of VEGF
(þ405C>G, 460T>C, 2578C>A, and 1154G>A) in susceptibility to psoriasis: a meta-analysis. DNA Cell Biol 2014;33:234e44.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

132

M. Rizov et al. / Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 56 (2017) 127e132

[50] Almawi WY. Relationship between VEGFA polymorphisms and serum VEGF
protein levels and recurrent spontaneous miscarriage. Hum Reprod 2013;28:
2628e35.
[51] Boudjenah R. Associations between Individual and combined polymorphisms
of the TNF and VEGF genes and the embryo implantation rate in patients
undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF) programs. PLoS One 2014;9:108e287.
[52] Simon A, Laufer N. Assessment and treatment of repeated implantation failure
(RIF). J Assist Reprod Genet 2012;29:1227e39.

[53] Nouri K, Haslinger P, Szabo L, Sator M, Schreiber M, Schneeberger C, et al.
Polymorphisms of VEGF and VEGF receptors are associated with the occurrence of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS)da retrospective caseecontrol study. J Ovarian Res 2014;7:54.
[54] Geva E, Jaffe RB. Role of vascular endothelial growth factor in ovarian physiology and pathology. Fertil Steril 2000;74:429e38.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

