Forty years of IVF
Craig Niederberger, M.D.,1,2,3 Antonio Pellicer, M.D.,3,4,5 Jacques Cohen, Ph.D., H.C.L.D.,6
David K. Gardner, D.Phil.,7,8 Gianpiero D. Palermo, M.D., Ph.D.,9 Claire L. O’Neill, B.S.,9 Stephen Chow, B.A.,9
Zev Rosenwaks, M.D.,9 Ana Cobo, Ph.D.,10 Jason E. Swain, Ph.D.,11 William B. Schoolcraft, M.D.,11,12
 Frydman, M.D.,13 Lauren A. Bishop, M.D.,14 Davora Aharon, M.D.,15 Catherine Gordon, M.D.,16
Rene
Erika New, M.D.,17 Alan Decherney, M.D.,14 Seang Lin Tan, M.D.,18 Richard J. Paulson, M.D., M.S.,19
€nnstro
€ m, M.D., Ph.D.,21,22 Jacques Donnez, M.D., Ph.D.,23,24
James M. Goldfarb, M.D., M.B.A.,20 Mats Bra
25
Sherman Silber, M.D., Marie-Madeleine Dolmans, M.D., Ph.D.,26,27 Joe Leigh Simpson, M.D.,28
, Ph.D.,31,32 Cristina Eguizabal, Ph.D.,33
Alan H. Handyside, Ph.D.,29,30 Santiago Munne
34
Nuria Montserrat, Ph.D., Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, Ph.D.,35 Alan Trounson, Ph.D.,36
Carlos Simon, M.D., Ph.D.,37,38,39,40 Togas Tulandi, M.D., M.H.C.M.,18 Linda C. Giudice, M.D., Ph.D.,41
Robert J. Norman, M.D., C.R.E.I.,42,43 Aaron J. Hsueh, Ph.D.,44 Yingpu Sun, M.D., Ph.D.,45 Neri Laufer, M.D.,46
Ronit Kochman, M.D.,46 Talia Eldar-Geva, M.D., Ph.D.,46,47 Bruno Lunenfeld, M.D., Ph.D.,48
Diego Ezcurra, D.V.M., M.Sc.,49 Thomas D’Hooghe, M.D., Ph.D.,50,51,52 Bart C. J. M. Fauser, M.D., Ph.D.,53
Basil C. Tarlatzis, M.D., Ph.D.,54 David R. Meldrum, M.D.,55,56 Robert F. Casper, M.D.,57,58
Human M. Fatemi, M.D., Ph.D.,59 Paul Devroey, M.D., Ph.D.,60,61 Daniela Galliano, M.D., Ph.D.,4,62
Matts Wikland, M.D., Ph.D.,63 Mark Sigman, M.D.,64,65 Richard A. Schoor, M.D., F.A.C.S.,66,67
Marc Goldstein, M.D.,68 Larry I. Lipshultz, M.D.,69 Peter N. Schlegel, M.D.,70
Alayman Hussein, M.B.B.Ch., M.Sc., M.D.,71 Robert D. Oates, M.D.,72 Robert E. Brannigan, M.D.,73
Heather E. Ross, Esq.,74 Guido Pennings, Ph.D.,75 Susan C. Klock, Ph.D.,76 Simon Brown, M.A.,77
 Van Steirteghem, M.D., Ph.D.,78 Robert W. Rebar, M.D.,79,80 and Andrew R. LaBarbera, Ph.D.81,82,83
Andre
1
Department of Urology, University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, IL; 2Department of Bioengineering,
University of Illinois at Chicago College of Engineering, Chicago, IL; 3Co-Editor in Chief, Fertility and Sterility; 4Instituto
 n Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia, Spain; 6Althea Science
Valenciano de Infertilidad (IVI), Rome, Italy; 5Instituto de Investigacio
and ART Institute of Washington, Hudson, NY; 7School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia; 8Melbourne IVF, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 9The Ronald O. Perelman and Claudia Cohen Center for
Reproductive Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY; 10IVI RMA, Valencia, Spain; 11CCRM IVF Network, Lone
Tree, CO; 12Colorado Center for Reproductive Medicine, Lone Tree, CO; 13Hospital Foch, Suresnes Grand, Paris, France;
14
Program in Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; 15Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY; 16Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University
of California Medical Center, Orange, CA; 17Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of South Florida
Health, Tampa, FL; 18Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada;
19
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, USC Fertility, University of Southern California, Keck School of Medicine,
Los Angeles, CA; 20Department of Reproductive Biology, Case Western Reserve School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH;
21
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden;
22
 Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium; 24Socie
 te
 de Recherche
Stockholm IVF, Stockholm, Sweden; 23Universite
^ le de Gyne
cologie, Institut de
 (SRI), Brussels, Belgium; 25Infertility Center of St. Louis, St. Louis, MO; 26Po
pour l'Infertilite
 rimentale et Clinique (IREC), Universite
 Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium; 27Gynecology
Recherche Expe
Department, Cliniques Universitaires Saint Luc, Brussels, Belgium; 28Department of Biomedical Engineering, Florida
International University, Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine, Miami, FL; 29London Women’s Clinic, London, UK;
30
School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK; 31Cooper Genomics, Livingston, NJ; 32Overture Life, New
York, NY; 33Cell Therapy and Stem Cell Group, Basque Center for Blood Transfusion and Human Tissues, Galdakao,
Spain; 34Pluripotent Stem Cells and Activation of Endogenous Tissue Programs for Organ Regeneration (PR Lab),
Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), Barcelona, Spain; 35Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for

Jacques Cohen reports grants from Life Global, personal fees from Cooper Genomics, non-ﬁnancial support from Althea Science as a product developer and
co-founder, personal fees and founder and director of ART Institute of Washington, outside the submitted work.
David K. Gardner reports research funding from Vitrolife AB, Sweden.
Joe Leigh Simpson reports he is on the advisory board for Roche Pharmaceutical, Natura, and Illumina, outside the submitted work.
Alan Handyside reports he is a part time employee of Illumina Inc, and holds a patent on Karyomapping assigned to Illumina with royalties paid.
Santiago Munne is an employee of CooperGenomics.
Carlos Simon is an employee of Igenomix.
Diego Ezcurra is an employee of EMD Serono, an afﬁliate of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany.
Thomas D’Hooghe is Vice President and Head of Global Medical Affairs Fertility, Research and Development, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany.
Bart Fauser reports personal fees from Ferring, Abbott, Pantharei Bioscience, Teva, Myovant, Ogeda, and Preglem/Gedeon Richter, during the conduct of
the study.
Basil Tarlatzis reports honorarium, consulting, advisory board, and travel grants from Ferring, honorarium from IBSA, travel support from Merck Serono,
advisory board honoraria for OvaScience, consultant honoraria for Roche, and travel grants from Angelini, outside the submitted work.
Robert Casper reports personal fees from Abbvie, Bayer, EMD Serono, Ferring, Merck, OvaScience, and Fertility Nutraceuticals; stock from OvaScience and
Circadian-Zirclight; and personal fees as the Medical Director of Insception-Lifebank, outside the submitted work.
Larry Lipshultz reports personal fees from American Medical Systems, AbbVie, Lipocine, Aytu Bioscience, and Endo Pharmaceuticals, outside the submitted
work.
Simon Brown is a freelance writer and in that capacity is employed by ESHRE as editor of its members magazine Focus on Reproduction.
Robert Rebar reports personal fees from Myovant, Journal Watch Women's Health, Clinical OB/GYN Alert, and Contraception (journal), outside the submitted work.
All other authors report nothing to disclose.
Fertility and Sterility® Vol. 110, No. 2, July 2018 0015-0282/$36.00
Copyright ©2018 American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2018.06.005
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
185
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA; 36Monash University and Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia;
37
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Valencia University & INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain; 38Igenomix, Parc Cientiﬁc
Valencia University, Valencia, Spain; 39Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA;
40
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; 41Center for Reproductive Sciences,
Center for Reproductive Health, University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; 42Robinson Research Institute,
School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia; 43FertilitySA, Adelaide, South Australia;
44
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA; 45Reproductive
Medical Centre, First Afﬁliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China; 46Hadassah Hebrew University,
Jerusalem, Israel; 47Shaare Zedek Medical Centers, Jerusalem, Israel; 48Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat
Gan, Israel; 49EMD Serono, Rockland, MA, a company of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; 50Global Medical Affairs
Fertility, Research and Development, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; 51Research Group Reproductive Medicine,
Department of Development and Regeneration, Organ Systems, Group Biomedical Sciences, KU Leuven (University of
Leuven), Leuven, Belgium; 52Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University Medical
School, New Haven, CT; 53Department of Reproductive Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands; 54Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology & Reproductive Medicine, School of Medicine, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece; 55Reproductive Partners San Diego, San Diego,
CA; 56Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, University of California, San Diego, California; 57Division of
Reproductive Sciences, University of Toronto, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto,
Canada; 58TRIO Fertility, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 59IVIRMA Middle-East, Abu Dhabi, UAE; 60Centre for Reproductive
 n IVI, Valencia, Spain;
Medicine, Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium; 61MFAKIH IVF, Abu Dhabi, UAE; 62Fundacio
63
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden; 64Division of Urology,
Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI; 65Lifespan, Providence, RI; 66Private Practice Urology, Old
Westbury, NY; 67Department of Surgery/Urology, New York Institute of Technology, College of Osteopathic Medicine,
Smithtown, NY; 68Department of Reproductive Medicine and Urology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York Presbyterian
Hospital, New York, NY; 69Division of Male Reproductive Medicine and Surgery, Scott Department of Urology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 70Department of Urology, James Buchanan Brady Foundation and Cornell
Reproductive Medicine Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY; 71Department of Urology and Andrology, Minia
University, Al Minya, Egypt; 72Department of Urology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA; 73Department
of Urology, Division of Male Reproductive Medicine and Men’s Heath, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL; 74Ross & Zuckerman, LLP, Northbrook, IL; 75Department of Philosophy and Moral Sciences,
Bioethics Institute Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; 76Departments of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Psychiatry,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL; 77ESHRE Central Ofﬁce, Grimbergen, Belgium; 78Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium; 79Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Western Michigan University Homer
Stryker M.D. School of Medicine, Kalamazoo, MI; 80Former Executive Director (2003-2013), American Society for
Reproductive Medicine, Birmingham, AL; 81Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Cincinnati College
of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH; 82Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School
of Medicine, Birmingham, AL; and 83Former Scientiﬁc Director/Chief Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer (2004-2016), American Society for
Reproductive Medicine, Birmingham, AL

This monograph, written by the pioneers of IVF and reproductive medicine, celebrates the history, achievements, and medical advancements made over the last 40 years in this rapidly growing ﬁeld. (Fertil Steril 2018;110:185–324. 2018 by American Society for
Reproductive Medicine.)
Key Words: History, IVF, laboratory, male reproduction, controlled ovarian stimulation
Discuss: You can discuss this article with its authors and other readers at https://www.fertstertdialog.com/users/16110-fertilityand-sterility/posts/33222-40-years-of-ivf.

188

Introduction
Craig Niederberger, M.D.
Editor-in-Chief
Antonio Pellicer, M.D.
Editor-in-Chief

ADVANCES IN THE IVF LABORATORY
189
191

195

How the Embryology Laboratory Has Changed!
Jacques Cohen, Ph.D., H.C.L.D.
Development of In Vitro Fertilization Culture
Media and the Importance of Blastocyst
Transfer
David K. Gardner, D.Phil.
The Story of ICSI
Gianpiero D. Palermo, M.D., Ph.D., Claire L. O’Neill,
B.S., Stephen Chow, B.A., and Zev Rosenwaks, M.D.

198

201

204

Oocyte Cryopreservation for Elective Fertility
Preservation
Ana Cobo, Ph.D.
The Often Overlooked Embryo Transfer
Jason E. Swain, Ph.D., and
William B. Schoolcraft, M.D.
Toward Single Embryo Transfer
Rene Frydman, M.D.

TECHNIQUES DEVELOPED FROM IVF
205

207

IVF from Incubation to Injection
Lauren A. Bishop, M.D., Davora Aharon, M.D.,
Catherine Gordon, M.D., Erika New, M.D., and
Alan Decherney, M.D.
In Vitro Maturation of Oocytes
Seang Lin Tan, M.D.

186
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
211
212

215
217

Oocyte Donation
Richard J. Paulson, M.D., M.S.
History of the Use of Gestational Carriers in the
United States
James M. Goldfarb, M.D., M.B.A.
Uterus Transplantation
Mats Br€annstr€
om M.D., Ph.D.
Fertility Preservation in Women for Medical
Reasons
Jacques Donnez, M.D., Ph.D., Sherman Silber, M.D.,
and Marie-Madeleine Dolmans, M.D., Ph.D.

223

226
230

234

Reproductive Genetics Paralleling Assisted
Reproductive Technology
Joe Leigh Simpson, M.D.
Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis of Monogenic
Disease and Human Leukocyte Antigen
Matching
Alan H. Handyside, Ph.D.
Evolution of Preimplantation Genetic Screening
Santiago Munne, Ph.D.
Repairing the Damaged Embryo: CRISPR-Cas9
Technology
Cristina Eguizabal, Ph.D., Nuria Montserrat, Ph.D.,
and Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, Ph.D.
Human Embryonic Stem Cells: The Discovery of
Pluripotency
Alan Trounson, Ph.D.

PATIENT SELECTION
237
240

242

245

266

269

272

GENETICS
221

263

The Endometrial Factor
Carlos Simon, M.D., Ph.D.
Treatment Evolution of Hydrosalpinx in Infertile
Women
Togas Tulandi, M.D., M.H.C.M.
Environment and Infertility: Its Role in Assisted
Reproductive Technologies
Linda C. Giudice, M.D., Ph.D.
Obesity and Reproduction
Robert J. Norman, M.D., C.R.E.I.

274

MALE REPRODUCTION
277
280

285

288

291

294

296

248

251

255

STIMULATION

AND

Ovarian Mechanisms Underlying Evolving
Assisted Reproductive Technologies
Aaron J. Hsueh, Ph.D., and Yingpu Sun, M.D., Ph.D.
Markers of Ovarian Function from Follicle€ llerian Hormone
Stimulating Hormone to Antimu
Neri Laufer, M.D., Ronit Kochman, M.D., and Talia
Eldar-Geva, M.D., Ph.D.
The Development and Evolution of Gonadotropins
in Assisted Reproduction Technology
Bruno Lunenfeld, M.D., Ph.D., Diego Ezcurra,
D.V.M., M.Sc., and Thomas D’Hooghe, M.D., Ph.D.

Semen Analysis
Mark Sigman, M.D.
Advances in Decision Making for the Evaluation
of Azoospermia in the Modern and Post-Modern
Era
Richard A Schoor, M.D.
Microsurgical Correction of Varicoceles and
Obstructive Azoospermia: Historical and Current
Clinical Perspective
Marc Goldstein, M.D. and Larry I. Lipshultz, M.D.
microTESE: An Evolved, Effective Procedure in
the Treatment of Severe Male Infertility
Peter N. Schlegel, M.D.
Endocrine Stimulation for Spermatogenesis in
the Azoospermic Male
Alayman Hussein, M.Sc., M.D.
The Genetic Basis of Male Reproductive Failure:
Early Discoveries and Clinical Consequences
Robert D. Oates, M.D.
Fertility Preservation in the Male
Robert E. Brannigan, M.D. and
Craig I. Niederberger, M.D.

THE BIG PICTURE
299

CONTROLLED OVARIAN
MONITORING

Progress in Ovarian Stimulation for IVF Over
Time
Bart C. J. M. Fauser, M.D., Ph.D. and
Basil C. Tarlatzis, M.D., Ph.D.
Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Agonists
and Antagonists in the Context of Cos and to
Trigger Ovulation
David R. Meldrum, M.D. and Robert F. Casper, M.D.
Understanding the Luteal Phase in Stimulated
Assisted Reproductive Technology Cycles
Human M. Fatemi, M.D., Ph.D and Paul Devroey,
M.D., Ph.D.
Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome
Antonio Pellicer, M.D. and
Daniela Galliano, M.D., Ph.D.
Role of Ultrasound in In Vitro Fertilization
Matts Wikland, M.D., Ph.D.

301

303

306

Legal and Ethical Aspects of In Vitro Fertilization
Heather E. Ross, Esq. and Guido Pennings, Ph.D.
In Vitro Fertilization and the Psychology of
Reproduction: Opportunity and Hope
Susan C. Klock, Ph.D.
European Society of Human Reproduction and
Embryology and the Advance of Assisted
Reproduction
Simon Brown M.A. and Andre Van Steirteghem,
M.D., Ph.D.
From American Fertility Society to American
Society for Reproductive Medicine: The Society
and Advances in Reproductive Medicine
Robert W. Rebar, M.D. and
Andrew R. LaBarbera, Ph.D.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
187
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

INTRODUCTION
Craig Niederberger, M.D.
Editor-in-Chief
Antonio Pellicer, M.D.
Editor-in-Chief
1978 was a remarkable year (1). The Nobel prize was awarded
for the discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation
that furnished the ﬁrst direct evidence of the big bang and
that time itself in our universe had a starting point. The
very ﬁrst online exchange forum, the predecessor of all public
communications, like blogs and social media, made its debut
in Chicago. Sony invented the Walkman, the ﬁrst portable
stereo and the father to the iPod. But without a doubt the technological advance that rivaled humans walking on the moon
some 9 years earlier was the birth of the ﬁrst IVF baby.
That human gametes could be fertilized outside of the
mother's uterus in an instance where reproduction would be
possible no other way, leading to an embryo that could then
develop as a fetus in the mother and born live changed the
world. Millions upon millions of children have been born
since that time who simply could not have been without the
development of IVF.
This monograph chronicles the arc of development of IVF
that began 40 years ago and follows the new questions asked
by the beginning of this new technology and the possibilities
that it created. It is designed not to be an exhaustive datadriven compendium, but a readable narrative of what has
happened in the past, what is happening at present, and
what may happen in the future. For those who are students
of reproductive medicine and who did not experience living
through the entirety of these past 40 years, it tells the story
of how and why you do what you do. For those who predate
1978, it serves as a thrilling ride through all of the varied
roads that IVF paved.
We begin with the laboratory, as that is where the heart of
IVF was born and where the foundations of our ﬁeld developed. At present our IVF laboratories appear totally different
from those in 1978. Initial implantation rates that were <5%
per embryo replaced were continuously increased, at present,
to rates >50%. The low implantation rates of the early days
was problematically addressed by increasing the number of
embryos replaced into the uterus and aggressive ovarian stimulation protocols, unfortunately often uncontrolled, introducing the two main complications of IVF in these 40
years—multiple pregnancies and ovarian hyperstimulation
syndrome (OHS). These challenges were intensively reported,
studied, and almost completely resolved.
Access to these early embryos in the laboratory also introduced a series of medical techniques that have been tremendously useful and provide new pathways to ﬁght against
disease by applying preimplantation genetic testing. In the
future perhaps we will be able to treat genetic diseases by
genomic editing.

Other techniques were developed to preserve fertility in
men and women with life-threatening illnesses for whom
the use of life-saving but gonadotoxic treatments may
compromise their future fertility. Cryopreservation of the
male gamete predated IVF, but oocyte cryopreservation
was far more challenging, which was ﬁnally solved a
quarter century into the story of IVF. Freezing the oocyte
has not only been effective in preserving fertility, but has
also given practitioners the ability to split the reproductive
cycle into different steps to improve outcomes and reduce
complications, such as OHS. In many ways, at present,
oocyte cryopreservation has changed the way we perform
IVF.
The protocols of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation
(COH) have also undergone substantial evolution, mainly
due to the research and development of new therapeutic
agents. But we also have learned that overly aggressive management of the ovaries was detrimental to a woman’s reproductive system. As a result, at present, the way we manage
COH is completely different from 40 years ago. The way we
monitor patients and perform oocyte retrievals has also
changed—the development of vaginal ultrasound in the
1980s has been a fundamental pillar in the advancement of
IVF.
Arguably the most important advance since 1978 in
the trajectory of IVF was the ability to insert a single
sperm into an ovum and achieve a live birth. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) made possible biological
parenthood when only a few sperm were available in
the ejaculate, and ultimately the previously unthinkable
source of sperm, the testis. But this technique raised its
own questions: which single sperm should one choose,
how, and why? We continue to search for answers to
these fundamental challenges that this remarkable reproductive tool engendered.
Of course IVF did not just fundamentally change reproductive possibilities for a mother, it did so for the father as
well. From evaluating male reproductive potential to therapy,
IVF opened avenues of investigation, created dilemmas, and
opened doors previously unimagined. With the ability to
use gametes obtained directly from the testis, we now can
truly probe medical therapies as we enter an age of controlled
spermatogenic stimulation.
We conclude with the big picture, how IVF created
legal and ethical challenges, and how mental health
and psychology play central roles in this new world of
reproductive technology. Finally, luminaries in our
reproductive medical societies, our places of vigorous
interaction in moving our ﬁeld forward, describe how
they came to be and how they are propelling us into a
better future.
We hope that you enjoy reading this monograph as
much as we enjoyed making it, and that wherever you are
in the arc of reproductive medical history, it will give you
insights into the remarkable ﬁeld that gives birth to the
unborn.

188
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

ADVANCES IN THE IVF LABORATORY
HOW THE EMBRYOLOGY
LABORATORY HAS CHANGED!
Jacques Cohen, Ph.D., H.C.L.D.
The human assisted reproduction laboratory has undergone
near-complete metamorphosis since the early days of IVF
(2). The increasing success rates with this technology are
owed in large part to these changes, including improvements
in quality control and embryo culture systems. Equally
important have been the advances in personnel training and
exchange of ideas and communication, which is not surprising as IVF matured during the information age. The ﬁrst IVF
laboratories were essentially improvised, sometimes ﬁtted
into existing surgery suites. Before 1985, there were no
‘‘add-on’’ procedures, no egg donation or surgical sperm retrievals, and no cryopreservation or micromanipulation. At
that time, there was little governmental oversight with few
licensing requirements. There was no specialized clinical or
laboratory training, therefore, skills were acquired mostly
through apprenticeships. The procedures in the laboratory
were performed by researchers with experience in experimental embryology and veterinary science. These pioneers
were establishing rules and principles, which evolved into international guidelines and standard operating procedures.
As astounding as the relatively quick rise of IVF may have
been, 40 years ago IVF was rarely viewed as an obvious treatment for subfertility. Despite numerous obstacles—most
important, a lack of public funding—assisted reproduction is
now well established. Its path seems to follow Moore’s Law
with linear increases in implantation rates, being just shy of
1% annually, corrected for maternal age (3). This linear progression has been relatively constant since the early days
and may predict a time in the near future when there is no
need for multiple attempts at pregnancy. It seems that IVF
will become an obvious form of safe reproduction, the means
to avoid deleterious mutations, inheritable or de novo, and to
allow prospective parents to build their families with forethought and deliberation. This future is possible because of
initiatives that started in the laboratory in 1978.
Before IVF was accepted as standard treatment for infertility, there was little to no concern about the laboratory environment, from cleanliness of work surface areas to air quality
in the conﬁnes of the laboratory. Although not typical, one
did come across improvised laboratories where staff was allowed to smoke and even enjoy a meal in between cases!
The ﬁrst dedicated clinical suite and laboratory to exclusively
perform IVF was built in Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom, in
the village of Bourn in 1980 by IVF pioneers Robert G. Edwards (scientiﬁc director) and Patrick Steptoe (medical director) and their senior team, which included Jean Purdy
(laboratory quality control manager), John Webster (senior
consultant), and Alan Dexter (ﬁnancial director). The move
to this private setting represented extraordinary courage, as
it had taken hundreds of attempts to achieve two births before

the planning of this dedicated facility (4). Other clinics were
opened as well, at the Royal Women’s Hospital in Australia
(Alex Lopata and Ian Johnston) and at Monash University
(Carl Wood and Alan Trounson), both in Melbourne, with
some government ﬁnancial support, and in London, United
Kingdom (Ian Craft) using private funding. At the Eastern Virginia Medical School in Norfolk, Virginia (USA), pioneers Howard and Georgiana Jones opened the ﬁrst US-based facility
using funds provided by the university. Other countries, such
as India, Austria, France, Holland, Sweden, and Spain, followed swiftly and established their own clinics. By 1985, a
new discipline was emerging, a ﬁeld that was for the ﬁrst
time referred to as assisted reproductive technology or ART.

Laboratory equipment and instrumentation:
from bell jars to time-lapse incubators
Just as formulation of the cell theory was intricately linked to
the development of the microscope, IVF and its associated
technologies have relied on engineering efforts by many
key individuals who have played important roles but unfortunately are rarely remembered. For instance, in 1850, John
Lawrence Smith, a faculty member at what is now Tulane
University (New Orleans, LA, USA), engineered the inverted
microscope. Robert Chambers from New York University
(USA) invented the ﬁrst micromanipulator for cell microsurgery in 1912. The ﬁrst incubators were used for hatching
chicken eggs and date back to ancient Egypt. In the 19th century, this changed to heated bell jars. Carbon dioxide incubators date from the 1960s, and warm-jacketed incubators were
developed in the 1970s.
In vitro fertilization-speciﬁc instrumentation began to be
introduced in the late 1980s, and this process is ongoing with
many companies now specializing in the area. The pioneering
laboratories relied completely on equipment and materials
that were designed for somatic cell tissue culture and not human (or mammalian) gametes and embryos. This is illustrated
by the presentations and discussions of the ﬁrst international
group of IVF clinicians and biologists, to convene at Bourn
Hall in 1981, to discuss the emerging IVF technology. The 26
attendants came from Basil (Switzerland), Cambridge (United
Kingdom), Gothenburg (Germany), Kiel (Germany), Manchester (United Kingdom), Melbourne (Australia), Norfolk, Virginia
(USA), Paris (France), and Vienna (Austria). In her chapter on
methods of fertilization and embryo culture in vitro in the proceedings of this ﬁrst conference on clinical IVF, Jean Purdy
wrote that, ‘‘The equipment needed in a tissue-culture laboratory has been described extensively by Paul (1970)’’ (5). This
was reﬂective of a conspicuous lack of specialized equipment
and disposables for IVF. Egg collection kits and ET catheters,
as well as a pump that allowed gentle aspiration of follicular
ﬂuid (FF) from ovarian follicles were among the ﬁrst IVFspeciﬁc instruments/devices to be developed. For the laboratory, laminar ﬂow workstations equipped with heated surfaces
were engineered. A benchtop incubator was later invented by

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
189
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
David Mortimer and colleagues in Australia as an alternative
to ‘‘big box’’ incubators to provide a more stable and controlled
culture environment. Incubators have continued to evolve and
improve and the present-day embryologists not only culture
embryos for longer periods of time, and with more conﬁdence,
they can also watch development frame by frame thanks to
incorporation of time-lapse microscopy into incubation systems. Close observation of embryos through superior microscopy has contributed to an understanding of the
morphology and timing of developmental events and the ability, albeit with limitations, to select/deselect embryos for
transfer and cryopreservation.

Culture media and culture systems: from simple salt
solutions to complex optimized culture media
Tissue culture media were ﬁrst developed nearly 150 years
ago by Ludwig and Ringer. These were simple salt solutions,
which were based on the properties of serum/blood plasma.
Knowledge was gained during those years about the biochemistry of metabolism in mammals and humans, particularly osmolarity, pH, and temperature. This knowledge provided the
basis for modiﬁcations to the simple salt solutions and successive generations of culture media, which were considerably more complex. The second generation of culture media
was developed in the 1970s, mimicking the female reproductive tract environment. This was followed by a third generation of media, which was designed to optimize growth
in vitro, to some extent ignoring existing formulations and
the ‘‘back to nature’’ principle behind those formulations. To
formulate these new media, the performance of each ingredient was evaluated separately using a ‘‘simplex optimization’’ process. This was ﬁrst developed for mouse embryo
culture by Professor John Biggers at Harvard University. His
work was supported by the US National Institutes of Health,
in part aiming to develop culture media for use in the human
while circumventing the moratorium still in place on human
embryo research. Variations on the second-generation media,
called sequential and third generation simplex optimizedderived media are still in use at present and seem equally
effective in supporting development of human embryos
through 6 or 7 days of culture in vitro. The departure from
home-brew culture media and the acceptance of commercially manufactured media, which is strictly regulated by
governmental agencies, very likely has contributed to improvements in laboratory and clinical outcomes by virtually
eliminating inconsistencies, manufacturing errors, and
batch-to-batch variability.
Culture systems have evolved too. In the 1930s, Carrell
ﬂasks (Gregory Pincus) were used to culture embryos or
perform in vitro insemination. In the 1950s, experimental embryologists like John Hammond and Wesley Whitten
switched to test tubes. In 1963, Ralph Brinster introduced
the culture of eggs and embryos in small droplets of culture
medium under a layer of parafﬁn oil (6). With some modiﬁcations, this ingenious ‘‘micro-drop’’ method using the Petri dish
has become the most widely used and successful system for
culture of mammalian embryos in vitro. Brinster’s contributions were for a long time unappreciated by human IVF spe-

cialists; early on, nearly all practitioners used either organ
culture dishes or small test tubes for culture of human gametes and embryos. But eventually, by the mid-1990s, most
IVF laboratories adopted the ‘‘closed’’ under-oil culture system. There is little doubt that this system has provided a better, more stable environment and signiﬁcant advantages for
embryonic growth, which were lacking in the open culture
systems of the past. This in turn has led to increased efﬁciency
and efﬁcacy of embryo culture.

Stafﬁng the IVF laboratory: from experimental to
clinical embryologists
Clinical embryology did not evolve in a vacuum but against a
backdrop of a 150-year history in experimental embryology,
cryobiology, and other related ﬁelds. When Bourn Hall Clinic
opened in 1980, Jean Purdy hired two laboratory assistants
who worked as quality control technicians. They handled the
Petri dishes, completed the paperwork, and witnessed procedures. The clinical embryologists, on the other hand, were
charged with the handling of gametes (including sperm preparation) and embryos and communication with patients. The
pioneering embryologists were often involved in optimizing
follicular recruitment protocols and timing of egg retrievals.
By 1983, when Louise Brown turned 5 years, worldwide fewer
than 100 embryologists were involved in clinical work. They
experienced a very different work environment than exists at
present—so much was unknown and there was little guidance.
At present, aspiring embryologists can participate in Master of
Embryology programs, and they can get training in speciﬁc
technologies and techniques through courses, which provide
hands-on experience. Embryologists and trainees can reinforce and expand their theoretical knowledge through a rich
literature of thousands of articles, dozens of textbooks and
‘‘how-to’’ books, and attend one of the many specialized workshops organized annually around the world. They can watch
videos on the Internet or participate in web-based journal clubs
and discussion groups. In some countries, embryology directors and managers must attain postgraduate credits to keep
qualiﬁcation standards and their laboratories must be audited
and certiﬁed. These new opportunities have provided for an
expansion of the workforce and the possibility to more appropriately staff ART laboratories. Proper stafﬁng itself is a significant contributor to improved safety and better outcomes (7).

The expanding horizons of IVF: from partial zona
dissection and subzonal insertion of sperm to
intracytoplasmic sperm injection, slow freezing
to vitriﬁcation, morphology to morphokinetics
and genetics
During the years, the IVF laboratory has incorporated many
transformative technologies that have continued to be reﬁned
and perfected. Most important have been oocyte and embryo
cryopreservation; assisted fertilization for treatment of male
factor infertility; genetic diagnosis of embryos before
transfer; and development of new embryo selection methodologies and platforms, including embryo morphokinetics using time-lapse microscopy.

190
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
Cryopreservation. Chris Polge and co-workers were the ﬁrst
to deep-freeze mammalian spermatozoa in 1949. Human
spermatozoa were frozen in Iowa (USA) a few years later,
by Raymond Bunge and Jerome Sherman. In 1971, David
Whittingham, Stanley Leibo, and Peter Mazur changed the
ﬁeld of embryology by freezing cleavage-stage mouse embryos (8). In the early 1980s, in relatively quick succession,
the human embryo was cryopreserved at all embryonic stages
from the zygote to the hatched blastocyst, with minor adaptations, but survival rates remained <80% for many years. The
effort was well founded in science, as basic scientists working
with rodents and farm animals had already mastered the technology years earlier. The past 10 years have seen a dramatic
improvement in oocyte and embryo cryopreservation with
the introduction/application of vitriﬁcation. With survival
rates of nearly 100%, treatment approaches that involve cryopreservation of all embryos and oocytes, have become more
viable, revealing clinical advantages of delayed transfer in
natural rather than stimulated cycles.
Assisted fertilization. Micromanipulation to assist fertilization was ﬁrst applied successfully in 1986 in the mouse
through zona drilling before insemination. During this procedure, an acidiﬁed Tyrode's solution was expelled onto the
zona by a micromanipulator to cause focal zona dissolution
and allowing spermatozoa easier access to the oolemma (9).
In 1988, babies were born to couples with male factor infertility after application of a mechanical form of zona drilling
(10). These were the ﬁrst pregnancies in the human established with the micromanipulator as a surgical tool. That
same year, teams in Singapore and Rome (Italy) reported on
injection of spermatozoa into the perivitelline space.
Although both methods improved the prospects for treatment
of more extreme forms of male factor infertility, fertilization
rates were low due to the absence of a quick block to polyspermy on the membrane level. However, once monospermic
fertilization was achieved, implantation rates were as high or
higher than after standard insemination. Assisted fertilization
improved dramatically with the introduction of intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) by a team in Brussels (Belgium)
(11). One important factor that led to this success was the
design of the injection tool (P. Devroey, personal communication). This needle was very thin, sharp, and straight unlike the
tools that were developed earlier. The design allowed nontraumatic piercing of the membrane and placement of spermatozoa in the cytoplasm with precision. It was quickly
demonstrated that fertilization rates were as high as conventional IVF even in the most severe of male factor cases. At present, ICSI is being used with increasing frequency, in some
cases replacing standard insemination altogether. Although
successful in terms of pregnancy, live birth rates, the wisdom
of nondiscriminant application of ICSI when it is not indicated continues to be debated.
Preimplantation genetic testing. Successful genetic diagnosis of single gene defects through blastomere biopsy, or
preimplantation genetic testing (PGT), was ﬁrst reported by
Alan Handyside (12) and the team at Hammersmith Hospital
in London in 1989. Basic science had again led the way in
this case, after Richard Gardner, while in the Cambridge lab-

oratories of Bob Edwards, showed in 1968 that trophectoderm
biopsy and sexing of the rabbit embryo was compatible with
obtaining live offspring (13). The development of PCR by
Gary Mullis and his team in the 1980s were crucial to the success of rapid single cell sequencing, which was a prerequisite
for PGT (14). The discovery of the high incidence of chromosomal anomalies in biopsied embryonic cells led to the
approach of testing of embryos and selective transfer of
only euploid embryos, a variation on PGT, now dubbed
PGT-A or PGT for aneuploidy (15). The efﬁcacy of PGT-A
(in all its variations) has been the subject of debate for >20
years. Embryo biopsy has shown that manipulation of embryos at a cellular level is not always without harm and optimization of the techniques is much needed. Perhaps this can
be achieved using a noninvasive biopsy-free approach? There
are also concerns about the high frequency of mosaicism, but
PGT has been of tremendous beneﬁt to couples at risk for
transmitting genetic disease.
Embryo selection technologies. One of the remaining challenges in the ART laboratory is the development of efﬁcacious (and affordable) embryo selection methods, which
would help facilitate routine single ET in all patient groups.
Early observers of embryo development in vitro were surprised by the apparent variation, not just between patients,
but among embryos of the same patient. In the mouse, small
aberrations from the morphological norm were known to
signiﬁcantly reduce implantation, but in the human, embryo
morphology and rate of development were only loosely
correlated with outcome. The search for important characteristics that could predict implantation has brought under
examination many aspects of gamete and embryo development in culture and complicated algorithms have been
developed. However, after 30 years, not a single common
morphological marker has been identiﬁed that can predict
the future success of an embryo with certainty. The recent
development of time-lapse microscopy has made permanent
record-keeping a reality, but reliable embryo selection using
a single parameter or algorithm applicable to all patients remains elusive.
Acknowledgments: Mina Alikani is gratefully acknowledged
for reading and commenting on the manuscript.

DEVELOPMENT OF IN VITRO
FERTILIZATION CULTURE MEDIA
AND THE IMPORTANCE OF
BLASTOCYST TRANSFER
David K. Gardner, D.Phil.
Deliberations on culturing the human embryo
Consideration of a cell’s physiology is a logical starting point
when trying to culture it. This premise is challenging when
considering the preimplantation human embryo, whose
physiology and metabolism changes dramatically from

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
191
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
fertilization to implantation. The fertilized oocyte and
cleavage-stage embryo are relatively quiescent, exhibit
limited oxidative capacity, and use carboxylic acids predominantly. In contrast, the blastocyst is one of the most active
tissues in the body, characterized by exponential growth,
expansion of a blastocoel, increased oxygen use and oxidative metabolism, a large demand for glucose (largely to
support biosynthetic requirements), and a somewhat paradoxical production of lactate through aerobic glycolysis
(thought to be key in embryonic signaling with the endometrium) (Fig. 1). The dynamics and complexities of preimplantation embryo physiology, therefore, help to explain the long
and complex road to blastocyst transfer.

Four decades of media in human
in vitro fertilization
Since the birth of Louise Brown in 1978, conditions used to
support development of the preimplantation human embryo
in the in vitro fertilization (IVF) laboratory have changed
considerably. During the early years of human IVF, there
was no specialized laboratory equipment and no embryospeciﬁc media for the task in hand. Consequently, culture
technologies were largely borrowed from tissue culture laboratories, which included the use of ‘‘big-box’’ styled incubators, designed to maintain carbon dioxide levels to buffer
the bicarbonate-based culture media. Before the 1990s the
media used in human IVF had two distinct categories. Tissue
culture media, such as Eagle’s minimal essential medium (also
called Dulbecco's minimum essential medium [DMEM]) and
Ham’s F-10 (16), which were nutrient rich, containing high
concentrations of glucose, amino acids, vitamins, nucleotides, and trace elements required to maintain somatic cell
lines in vitro. The other type of media used was simple
balanced salt solutions such as Earle’s (16). Such media lacked
amino acids and vitamins, and were really just salt solutions
supplemented with the carbohydrates pyruvate, lactate, and
glucose. Typically both types of media were supplemented
with serum, either the patient’s own or from fetal cord blood.
These types of media were not speciﬁcally designed to support
the human embryo in culture, and although they could keep
the cleavage-stage embryo alive, they could not readily support the development of viable human blastocysts. Consequently, transfer of embryos at the pronucleate oocyte and
cleavage-stage embryo to the uterus (asynchronously) was
adopted out of necessity. Resultant implantation rates using
this approach were low, typically 10%–15%, and therefore
it became routine to transfer more than one embryo to attain
acceptable pregnancy rates (PRs). In 1995, the average number of embryos transferred was four. However, the downside
to having to transfer multiple embryos is the ﬁnite probability
of conceiving with more than one baby. During the 1990s and
early 2000s, the medical concerns for both mother and babies
as a result of IVF pregnancies established with twins, triplets,
or high order multiple gestations were well founded and
frequently reviewed (17).
In the mid-1980s, Menezo (18) and Quinn (19) and their
colleagues developed two embryo-speciﬁc media, B3 and human tubal ﬂuid (HTF), respectively. Menezo’s B3 medium

included nucleotides, vitamins, and amino acids, and showed
that serum was not required for culture of the cleavage-stage
human embryo, and that serum albumin could be used as the
protein source. Quinn’s HTF medium was a modiﬁcation of
the earlier simple embryo culture media, such as Earle’s and
T6, and was supplemented with serum. Both media were subsequently used for cleavage-stage embryo culture and transfer. However, although these media were developed with the
human embryo in mind, they only supported development
of embryos during the cleavage stages, culminating in a PR
in the 20% range after the transfer of more than one embryo
(18, 19).
Fortuitously, in the late 1980s there was a resurgence of
interest in the physiology of the human embryo and the female reproductive tract, which in combination led to the
development of serum-free, stage-speciﬁc media (16). Analysis of the embryos from several mammalian species determined that the inclusion of serum not only compromised
development, physiology, metabolism, and the epigenetic
state of the embryo, but was also associated with adverse
outcomes after transfer (20). Furthermore, serum introduced
variability into the culture system, making it impossible to
compare data from patient to patient, and from clinic to
clinic, and also prohibiting the analysis of embryo physiology. Another issue raised from the animal literature
was of asynchronous embryo transfer (ET) to the uterus.
Although the transfer of pronucleate oocytes and
cleavage-stage human embryos to the uterus can result in
pregnancies, in all mammalian species studied at present,
the transfer of cleavage-stage embryos results in seriously
compromised transfer outcomes compared with transfer at
the blastocyst stage (21). The reason: the environments
within the oviduct and uterus differ signiﬁcantly in terms
of nutrient availability, and the presence of a complex
mixture of cytokines and growth factors in the uterus (21).
Therefore, the transfer of a cleavage-stage embryo to the
uterus places it into an environment that is not ideal, and
hence its physiology is compromised. As a result, it became
imperative to develop serum-free culture systems that could
support the development of viable human blastocysts to
synchronize the embryo with its in vivo environment.
Analysis of the human oviduct and uterine ﬂuids, at the
time when the embryo resides there, revealed distinct differences in the concentrations of carbohydrates. The oviduct is
characterized by relatively high levels of pyruvate (0.32
mM) and lactate (10.5 mM), with relatively low levels of
glucose (0.5 mM). In contrast, the human uterus contains relatively low concentrations of pyruvate (0.1 mM) and lactate
(5.87 mM), but higher levels of glucose (3.15 mM) (22). The
signiﬁcance of these gradients is twofold. First the availability
of nutrients reﬂects the dynamic metabolism associated with
the preimplantation period, which progresses from a metabolism based on pyruvate and lactate, to one based on
glucose, and second, the actual concentration of nutrients
available to the embryo not only affects metabolism but
also the epigenome (20). The relative availability of nutrients
within the female reproductive tract mirrors precisely the
changing requirements of the preimplantation embryo at
each stage of development (20).

192
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 1
Pre Compaction

Post Compaction

Resides in the oviduct

Resides in the uterus

One cell type

Two distinct cell types: Inner cell mass &
Trophectoderm

Individual cells

Transporting epithelium

Maternal genome, in the form of stable
mRNA derived from the oocyte

Embryonic genome

Low biosynthetic activity

High biosynthetic activity

Low QO2

High QO2

Metabolism based on low levels of
oxidation of pyruvate, and some use of
the malate-aspartate shuttle

Metabolism based on both high levels of
glucose oxidation and the ability to produce
lactate through aerobic glycolysis (the latter
being required for signaling and for increased
biosynthesis)

Requirement for specific amino acids
including alanine, aspartate, glutamate,
glycine, proline, serine, and taurine,
which act as pH regulators, osmolytes,
antioxidants, and chelators
Highest sensitivity to its environment,
lacking many mechanisms required to
maintain intracellular homeostasis
Difficult to attribute viability to
morphological features

Requirement for a more comprehensive group
of amino acids, with optimal development of
the inner cell mass requiring essential amino
acids
With the development of a transporting
epithelium, the embryo acquires greater
resilience
Ability to more accurately assess embryo
viability through the grading of the two-cell
types

Characteristics of human preimplantation embryo development.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

Of physiological signiﬁcance, the oviduct is characterized
by high levels of amino acids not required by somatic cells such
as alanine, glycine, serine, proline, and taurine. These amino
acids fulﬁll several key physiological roles during cleavage
stages and hence have a signiﬁcant role in supporting early
development in culture (Fig. 1). The inclusion of amino acids
results in increased viability and development after transfer
in animal models (23). Embryos after the compaction stage
have a different amino acid requirement to the cleavage stages,
using all amino acids. These and other data lay the foundations
for the development of stage-speciﬁc sequential media, the

ﬁrst of which were G1 and G2. Before clinical use, these media
underwent extensive animal embryo experimentation and
>5,000 embryos (both laboratory and domestic animals)
were transferred and fetal development analyzed (23). Having
established their efﬁcacy in animal models, the media underwent a pilot clinical study using donated embryos to determine
their effectiveness. Once this was established, a pilot transfer
study was undertaken to ensure that the pregnancies and resultant children were healthy, followed by a prospective randomized trial, to determine the clinical efﬁcacy of these media. The
latter establishing that day 5 transfer was associated with a

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
193
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
signiﬁcant increase in implantation rate compared with the
transfer of cleavage-stage embryos (24). Hence, the introduction of sequential culture media into human IVF followed
amongst the most comprehensive development of any new
technology introduced into clinical IVF.
Several years after the ﬁrst clinical use of sequential media, Biggers and Racowsky (25) evaluated whether the mouse
embryo culture medium, KSOM(AA), could support human
embryo development to the blastocyst stage. This medium
was derived using a computer program, which generated successive media formulations based on the response of mouse
embryos in culture to form blastocysts. The original simplex
optimized medium was termed SOM, and subsequently
KSOM (which contains around 10 times more potassium
than SOM). This variation was modiﬁed by another laboratory
to include amino acids, which subsequently became known as
a global medium clinically. More recently, the advent of timelapse microscopy has created demand for uninterrupted culture (although this approach is not considered physiological)
(26). In such monophasic media, the embryo is not exposed to
physiological nutrient gradients as it develops and differentiates. Although at present data indicate that both media types
appear to give similar outcomes with regard to blastocyst formation and pregnancies (27), the long-term outcomes of
sequential and monophasic systems await analysis. The
composition of human embryo culture media and the development of modern culture systems have recently been extensively reviewed (16)

One needs more than media to grow an embryo
During the past 4 decades our understanding of mammalian
embryo physiology has increased signiﬁcantly, and several
factors other than media have been shown to have a profound
effect on embryo development, metabolism, epigenetics, and
subsequent viability (reviewed in detail in Gardner and Kelley,
2017 [20]). Maintaining a stable temperature and pH has been
shown to be key to attain and maintain excellent clinical outcomes (20). However, it is the oxygen concentration that is
also crucial in embryo culture. Atmospheric oxygen is 20%,
whereas physiological levels in the reproductive tract are
around 5%. Compared with physiological levels, atmospheric
oxygen is highly detrimental to the embryos of all mammalian
species studied, negatively affecting metabolism, the proteome, gene expression, and the epigenome (20). Furthermore,
oxygen predisposes the embryo to greater vulnerability from
other stresses in the culture system (20). Disappointingly, it
was reported that 75% of IVF clinics surveyed use atmospheric
oxygen for some part of the embryo culture, whereas a staggering 25% used this high oxygen throughout the entire embryo culture (28). The use of different oxygen concentrations
during human embryo culture has made the comparisons of
outcomes between clinics extremely difﬁcult.
Impact of blastocyst transfer. The physiological and potential advantages of blastocyst transfer are listed in Table 1.
All of these, combined with the excellent survivability of
the blastocyst after vitriﬁcation, underlie the signiﬁcance
and continued increase in the uptake of blastocyst transfer.

TABLE 1
Importance of blastocyst transfer in human in vitro fertilization.
Synchronization of embryonic stage with the uterus, known to
compromise pregnancy outcome in animal models
Reduced uterine contractions by day 5, thereby reducing the
potential for embryo expulsion
Ability to grade the embryo proper through the quantiﬁcation of the
inner cell mass and trophectoderm, thereby improving embryo
selection
Increased implantation rates
Signiﬁcant reduction in fetal loss during gestation
Reduced time to pregnancy
Facilitated a greater uptake of single embryo transfer worldwide,
thereby reducing the complications associated with multiple
births
Allowed for the introduction of trophectoderm biopsy for
preimplantation genetic screening and diagnosis, resulting in less
damage to the embryo than biopsy of the cleavage stages
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

Evaluation of clinical data. Although the advantages of blastocyst transfer have been presented, analysis of the literature reveals a less than conclusive story. A review by Maheshwari et al.
(29) concluded that the data to support blastocyst transfer were
weak, and although several articles reported good outcomes
with blastocyst transfer, this was not always the case. A subsequent analysis of the studies revealed that there were striking
differences in the ways in which human embryos had been
cultured. In particular, those studies that did not ﬁnd a beneﬁt
of blastocyst transfer had used atmospheric oxygen, whereas a
commonality among those studies reporting signiﬁcant beneﬁts
from day 5 transfer had all used 5% oxygen for embryo culture
(16). This latter point highlights the difﬁculties of interpreting
meta-analyses, when the studies included are all assumed to
have performed IVF in the same way, when in fact this is simply
not the case. This clearly underlines the need for a standardization of reporting of methods used in all aspects of the treatment
of our patients during clinical studies and trials.

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
The introduction of blastocyst transfer has been one of the most
thoroughly investigated technologies introduced into human
IVF, supported by hundreds of publications from several animal
species as well as clinical trials. An initial concern regarding day
5 transfers was that the extra 2 days in culture could induce
aberrant epigenetic proﬁles of the embryo, and that we would
actually introduce more harm than good. This does not appear
to have been the case. Rather, the human embryo is at its greatest
sensitivity during the cleavage stages (26), and studies have revealed that any evidence of abnormal imprinting is either
induced during oocyte maturation/superovulation, or during
the cleavage stages, and are not added to by an additional 48
hours in culture (20). What is evident is that implantation rates
have increased, pregnancy losses have decreased (30), and that
the time to pregnancy has been greatly reduced, following the
introduction of blastocyst transfer. Given the signiﬁcant
emotional stress associated with infertility treatment, and the
high dropout rate after a failed transfer, time to pregnancy is a
highly relevant issue for our patients.

194
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

THE STORY OF ICSI
Gianpiero D. Palermo, M.D., Ph.D.,
Claire L. O’Neill, B.S., Stephen Chow, B.A.,
and Zev Rosenwaks, M.D.
The beginning of IVF
This year we celebrate the 40th anniversary of IVF.
Although it was a remarkable achievement, it was accompanied by a frustrating issue—the unexpected occurrence of
complete fertilization failure observed 1 day after insemination—a predicament that precludes the chance of rescuing a
particular cycle. Even at present, fertilization failure continues to be an unpredictable and signiﬁcant limitation to
IVF success. In the early 1980s, the very pioneers who introduced the world to IVF envisioned applying assisted reproductive technology (ART) to the treatment of male factor
infertility (31). The issue was that these male factor cases
were characterized by severely compromised semen parameters, and it became obvious that a threshold of about 40%
motility and at least 10 million spermatozoa was required to
attempt standard in vitro insemination with realistic chances
for success.
Nonetheless, even with an adequate number of spermatozoa, fertilization often failed. This failure led to changes in
the way semen was prepared, with the goal of enhancing the
selection of the most motile spermatozoon by swim-up or
density gradient techniques, as well as allowing spermatozoa to capacitate before reaching the egg. The specimen
vessel itself, originally a tube, was replaced by a Petri dish
to better observe gametic interaction and to discern the
number of spermatozoa necessary for insemination in microdrops. This restriction was introduced to increase the intermingling of the two gametes. However, this technique did
not successfully address the issue at hand, as it was common
to see fertilization rates of barely 50% when mild male factor cases were involved.
The growing interest in the treatment of male factor cases
sparked the development of assisted fertilization. In the early
1980s, the ﬁrst attempts to actively manipulate gametes were
made, leading to the development of techniques designed to
strip the zona pellucid (ZP), partially digest it, or crack it altogether (32–34). These techniques were merely an attempt to
enhance, albeit simplistically, gamete interaction. They were
often performed on a fraction of the oocytes, with the
remaining ones subjected to standard insemination.
Although these attempts modestly increased fertilization
rates, in many cases investigators were still plagued by
fertilization failure or by an unacceptably high rate of
polyspermic fertilization.

How intracytoplasmic sperm injection came about
In 1988, Gianpiero Palermo began a sabbatical in Brussels at
the Academic Hospital of the Dutch-speaking Brussels Free
University. The sabbatical was arranged by his mentor at
the University of Bari, Vincenzo Traina, and Andre van Steir-

teghem, who was visiting the university during Palermo’s last
year of residency in obstetrics and gynecology. Van Steirteghem was familiar with the university because he and
other international pioneers of ART, including the Joneses,
came to Bari in 1982 for one of the ﬁrst world congresses
on IVF.
When Palermo arrived in Brussels, he attended a scientiﬁc
workshop at the Center for Reproductive Medicine at the University Hospital Brussels, where he met key members of the
group and familiarized himself with ART and its related challenges. He was immediately fascinated by the work, and he
began learning transvaginal ultrasound-guided oocyte
retrieval, expanding his knowledge of stimulation protocols,
and gaining experience in embryology laboratory techniques.
During the course of his research with van Steirteghem, it
became clear that the major concern with IVF was the
inability to predict fertilization in male factor cases.
Later that year, several articles were published on the use
of microinjection procedures, including one on subzonal
insemination (SUZI) (35) and another describing a spermatozoon that had been injected directly into the oocyte cytoplasm
(36). This micromanipulation technique—the direct injection
of a single spermatozoon—was the most elegant, as it empowered the male gamete to be used with an emphasis on the single cell. Palermo began practicing with unfertilized human
eggs from cycle attempts, and then proceeded to inject human
spermatozoa into hamster eggs. Later, he tried to microinject
in the mouse to achieve a live offspring. This was particularly
difﬁcult, as the presence of the perforatorium on the mouse
sperm nucleus requires a pipette much wider than the actual
diameter of the sperm head; in fact, it is even larger than
the pipette used for human intracytoplasmic sperm injection
(ICSI) (paradoxically, to inject a mouse oocyte that is half
the diameter of a human egg).
Prior experimental work involved removing the spermatozoon’s ﬂagellum to facilitate the injection, but these attempts failed to achieve an offspring. A few years later, it
was conﬁrmed that retaining the ﬂagellum was the key to
ICSI success in humans. This was later corroborated by the
hypothesis of the paternal inheritance of the human
centrosome (37).
Eventually, Palermo devised a subzonal injection—
rendered popular by the work of Simon Fishel in Italy (38)—
of the mouse egg by inserting a single spermatozoon within
the perivitelline space. However, this did not yield consistent
fertilization due to the asymmetry of the mouse acrosome,
causing sporadic contact between the inner acrosomal membrane and the oolemma. Therefore, he decided to improve the
chances of fertilization by enhancing the acrosome reaction
(39). This led to the human application of the technique,
and several couples were subsequently treated by SUZI (40).
The procedure Palermo devised entailed a customized injection within the perivitelline space, a technique that proved
auspicious to the development of ICSI (41).
At the time of the development of the procedure in
Belgium, the research unit was located a few yards away
from the embryology laboratory where the human eggs
were retrieved. Oocytes were transported to the research laboratory for micromanipulation in a thermostatic box, and the

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
195
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 2
100
19.2

90

Propor on of ART (%)

80

67.8

IVF
ICSI

51.2

70
60
50
80.8

40

30
20

48.8
32.2

10

0

1993

1995

2002-2017

Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) prevalence during 25 years at
The Ronald O. Perelman and Claudia Cohen Center for
Reproductive Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine. During the past 25
years, ICSI utilization at Cornell has grown in prevalence from just
32.2% of all assisted reproductive technology (ART) cycles in 1993
to encompass 80.8% of all ART cases performed in the past 15 years.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

resulting embryos were walked back to embryology laboratory for transfer. Each micromanipulation cycle was stressful
and time-consuming; every attempt required transporting the
oocytes from the embryology laboratory, preparing the media
solutions, sterilizing the glassware, and customizing the
microinjection tools. Preparing the media solutions was the
most challenging aspect of the entire assisted fertilization
protocol, particularly the sperm preparation. It required
formulating a method to select spermatozoa, incubate or treat
them to enhance the acrosome reaction, and then identify the
most appropriate sperm cell for injection. This was in addition
to performing cumulus cell removal, injection, and careful
culture of the embryo.
Implementing a micromanipulation protocol for use in
clinical cases was daunting, not only logistically but also
in terms of experimental design. During a visit by Basil Tarlatzis, he and van Steirteghem suggested that to prove the
superiority of micromanipulation, the oocytes should be
split between the standard insemination method and the
microinjection procedure. Palermo argued against this
approach due to reports at the time by Jacques Cohen’s
group, who performed standard IVF and partial zona dissection within the same oocyte cohort (34). Palermo was concerned that the inevitable replacement of embryos derived
from different insemination methods would obscure the accomplishments of the micromanipulation technique. He
asked that couples only be referred to him if they had experienced consistent failure after being treated several times in
the standard fashion by IVF. He would then use the micromanipulation procedure for the entire cohort of oocytes
retrieved.
At ﬁrst, Palermo only included couples with enough spermatozoa available to rule out protocol issues with the tech-

nique. The subsequent inclusion of couples in which the
male partners presented with low sperm concentrations resulted in extremely unpredictable fertilization rates.
During a subzonal injection of three spermatozoa into the
perivitelline space within an oolemma dimple, a breach in the
membrane allowed a spermatozoon to penetrate the cytoplasm of an oocyte. Palermo told van Steirteghem about
this accidental penetration of the spermatozoon during the
SUZI procedure. Van Steirteghem said that based on the early
experiences in Norfolk, Virginia (USA), injecting into the
cytoplasm does not work, and that it should not even be tried.
However, Palermo noticed that after continual recurrence of
these incidental punctures, fertilization almost always
occurred. He decided to perform ICSI on a few oocytes within
each SUZI cohort. When these injections resulted in embryos
of good quality, they would be selected for transfer. After four
pregnancies (42), he and van Steirteghem realized that they
were on the verge of something new and promising for the
ﬁeld.
In early 1993, one year after reporting the ﬁrst ICSI pregnancy in Belgium, Palermo contacted Zev Rosenwaks
inquiring about a position in the clinical and research embryology laboratories at Weill Cornell Medical College. Rosenwaks, realizing the revolutionary impact of Palermo’s
accomplishment, was enthusiastic about recruiting Gianpiero
to Cornell.

Popularity
Since its establishment, the use of ICSI in centers worldwide
has steadily grown, maintaining a comfortable majority
over standard in vitro insemination cycles in many countries,
and comprising a virtual totality of all ART cases performed in
others. In fact, data published by the International Committee
Monitoring Assisted Reproductive Technologies for 2008–
2010 indicate that for the 60 countries that reported in those
years, 1,980,244 ART cycles were carried out by ICSI, representing 67% of all cases performed, with an equivalent proportion of the 1,144,858 newborns reported resulting from
sperm injection cycles (43).
At The Ronald O. Perelman and Claudia Cohen Center
for Reproductive Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, we
have also observed a progressive increase in the use of
ICSI since its initial implementation (Fig. 2). During the
past 25 years, we have performed 15,137 cycles of standard
in vitro insemination, resulting in a fertilization rate of
68.5% (123,007/179,695), a clinical pregnancy rate (PR)
(characterized by the presence of a fetal heartbeat) of
42.2% (5,533/13,105), and an ongoing/delivery rate of
34.6% (4,536/13,105).
In terms of ICSI cycles, we have performed 33,006 with
ejaculated spermatozoa, resulting in an overall fertilization
rate of 75.3% (176,974/234,927), a clinical PR of 37.7%
(10,875/28,870), and an ongoing/delivery rate of 32.8%
(9,464/28,870) in transferred cycles. The Center for Reproductive Medicine has also treated men with azoospermia, which
requires a surgical sperm extraction, in 3,046 cases. The use
of ICSI with surgically retrieved sources of spermatozoa has
resulted in an overall fertilization rate of 58.4% (15,843/

196
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 3

ICSI

TESE

1992

1993

Palermo et al.,
Lancet, 340:17

MESA

1994

Tournaye et al.,
Fertil Steril, 61:1045

Schoysman et al.,
Lancet, 342:1237

Cryo
MESA

Cryo
TESE

Cryo
Oocyte

PGD
Fragile X

IVM
Oocyte

1995

1996

1997

1999

2000

Podsiadly et al.,
Hum Reprod, 11:1306

Devroey et al.,
Hum Reprod, 10:903

Sermon et al.,
Prenat Diagn, 19:1223

Porcu et al.,
Fertil Steril, 68:724

Cha et al.,
Fertil Steril, 73:978

Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) landmarks. Since the introduction of ICSI, several cardinal assisted reproductive technology (ART) procedures
have been developed that have beneﬁted from the utilization of ICSI as a method of insemination.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

27,137), a clinical PR of 43.2% (1,184/2,740), and an ongoing/
delivery rate of 39.1% (1,071/2,740) in transferred cycles.
Although our use of ICSI may seem disproportionate, it
reﬂects the unique nature of our Center. When they come to
us, many of our patients have already been classiﬁed elsewhere as having severe male factor infertility, and they often
have had repeated ART failure. In addition, our close collaboration with the Reproductive Urology Service at Cornell appeals to patients who elect to use ICSI with surgically retrieved
spermatozoa.
Although signiﬁcant advances have been made in treating patients with severe male factor infertility, in which no
spermatozoa can be isolated from the ejaculate, occasionally
we are unable to retrieve any gametes from men who suffer
from maturation arrest or germ cell aplasia. Spermatozoa
are not generated within the seminiferous tubule at all in
these instances.
It should be noted that many researchers are looking to
push these boundaries in the ﬁeld of male factor infertility
(44). Some investigators are attempting to use stem cell therapy and extended germ cell culture to give men with severe
male factor infertility the opportunity to have a biological
child. With the inevitable arrival of these techniques,
including in vitro spermatogenesis and possibly neogametogenesis, the only plausible insemination method for these
cells will be ICSI. This suggests that ICSI will remain a pillar
of ART treatments for the foreseeable future.

Outlook
When the ﬁrst ICSI report was published (42), it was clear that
the procedure would revolutionize the treatment of infertility,
as it extended our ability to treat patients with male factor
infertility. A total of 50% of all infertility, either in combination or alone, is due to male factor infertility. It can be said

that ICSI is as much of a breakthrough as the development
of IVF itself.
At present, there is an array of indications for the application of this reliable insemination method (Fig. 3). The ability
to pair timed fertilization with the sparing use of spermatozoa
also renders ICSI a particularly desirable tool for use in developing technologies. However, we do recognize that there are
concerns about its excessive use. At our Center, the decision
to use ICSI often begins in the clinic and involves thoroughly
counseling patients and obtaining their explicit consent. For
the rare cases in which the decision is left to the embryology
laboratory, ICSI use is primarily dictated by the characteristics
of a suboptimal inseminating specimen. To add an additional
layer of objectivity, the decision to perform the procedure is
made by the team responsible for standard in vitro insemination rather than by the ICSI team itself. In addition, our clinic
often serves as a referral center due to its collaboration with
reproductive urologists, who strongly favor the use of ICSI
to treat their severe male factor cases.
There are risks involved with ICSI procedures. These techniques bypass the natural selection and, most important, use
gametes from men who often have a subtle genetic issue that
affects their fertility, which could lead to consequences for
their offspring. There is wide agreement in our ﬁeld for the
need to properly evaluate the children conceived by all ART
procedures. Although there have been many reassuring
studies (45) on the perinatal outcomes of newborns and on
the developmental health of young children from ICSI, this
anniversary marks the ﬁrst two and a half decades of using
the procedure, culminating in long-awaited initial followup reports on adolescents and young adults conceived with
ICSI. These studies have provided encouraging results on
the medical and reproductive health of the ﬁrst cohorts to
reach reproductive age (45). Continued follow-up reports on
the health of ICSI offspring will provide invaluable analysis

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
197
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
on the safety of the procedure as well as insights into any confounders that may affect its outcomes.
At present, ICSI remains the preferred insemination
protocol, with some centers using it in >90% of their insemination cycles. It is possible that ICSI will be perceived by
future generations as the evolution of standard in vitro
insemination.

OOCYTE CRYOPRESERVATION FOR
ELECTIVE FERTILITY PRESERVATION
Ana Cobo, Ph.D.
Elective fertility preservation
Successful fertility preservation (FP) has revolutionized assisted reproduction practice. Fortunately, we have overcome the
challenge of safeguarding reproductive capacity by saving
oocytes to acquire future biological offspring. A large population is likely to beneﬁt from this approach, including women
about to be treated for cancer or immunological disease,
whose reproductive potential may be affected by using gonadotoxic agents (46, 47). The FP is also useful for women with
genetic predisposition to premature ovarian reserve depletion.
Patients with other disorders, like endometriosis that may
compromise future fertility, can also beneﬁt from FP (46).
Safe oocyte storage is now a reality and has resulted from
hard work in the cryobiology ﬁeld for almost three decades.
Before oocyte cryopreservation, embryo freezing was the
preferred option for FP in postpubertal women. However,
the semen sample requirement could be inconvenient for single women, or even for women with partners. Ovarian tissue
freezing is also available when oocyte cryopreservation is not
a valid alternative, given the need to either initiate cancer
treatment immediately or the impossibility of performing
ovarian stimulation when hormone-sensitive tumors are
present (47).
Thanks to vitriﬁcation, oocytes can now be harvested and
safely stored to attempt pregnancy in the future when diseases are cured or when circumstances become more favorable (48). A recent meta-analysis (49) showed that
vitriﬁcation is superior to slow freezing for clinical outcomes
and cryosurvival. Although the technology was initially
validated large scale in ovum donation programs (50), its
efﬁciency for patients conducting IVF autologous cycles is
proven (51–53).
Once this technique became available for medical indications, its use for nonmedical reasons was not long in coming. Therefore, another population is increasingly using FP;
it includes women who wish to postpone motherhood and
childbirth for no apparent medical reason. These motivations are frequently grouped as ‘‘social reasons’’ or ‘‘elective
fertility preservation (EFP)’’ where the main reason is agerelated fertility decline (54). At present, many women are
dedicated to their careers and delay pregnancy until after
younger childbearing years. Women are often forced to
choose between motherhood and their professional aspira-

tions and ﬁnancial security (55). This leads to delayed motherhood, which explains why women visiting reproductive
clinics are usually more than in their mid-30s. As a result,
they endure repeated failed cycles because of advanced
maternal age or search for egg donation programs. Lack of
a partner is also a common reason for delaying pregnancy
and it affects mainly developed countries, where signiﬁcantly low birth rates are reported. These social pressures
make women decide to ‘‘stop’’ their biological clock by
freezing their oocytes. A survey study that analyzed
women's attitudes to EFP shows that a signiﬁcant proportion of young women would consider safeguarding their
reproductive potential, or at least are open to the idea of social oocyte freezing (56, 57). The number of women who
decide on elective oocyte freezing has recently grown
exponentially (46, 58). In our experience, this ﬁgure
means a ﬁvefold increase during an 8-year period (58). Undoubtedly, this new ﬁeld in IVF represents a milestone for
not only assisted reproduction workers, but also embodies
a means for women’s emancipation (59).
We herein review available evidence for oocyte vitriﬁcation efﬁciency in women who sought EFP. We also brieﬂy
overview the vitriﬁcation technique.

The technique
Vitriﬁcation is a physical phenomenon that involves the solidiﬁcation of an aqueous solution without ice. Vitriﬁcation
circumvents ice formation by the direct conversion from
liquid into a vitreous solid. This process is facilitated by
applying high cooling rates and increasing viscosity (60),
which, in turn, increases the glass transition and results in vitreous solid forms. Factors, other than cryoprotectant concentration and cooling rates, are strongly involved with the
efﬁcient vitriﬁcation probability. To improve survival Seki
and Mazur (61) demonstrated that the warming rate was
even more critical than the cooling rate. The technique’s
main shortcoming is that it needs a high cryoprotectant concentration, which can damage oocytes and embryos through
chemical toxicity and osmotic stress. Improved protocols
lower toxicity and support high cooling rates by using very
small volumes (62). Traditionally, the devices that use minimum volumes are plunged directly into liquid nitrogen to
allow direct contact with samples and are known as open systems. Conversely, closed systems avoid direct contact between samples and liquid nitrogen thanks to their hermetic
sealing before vitriﬁcation. The main advantage of these systems is that may be safer as they avoid contamination from
any infectious agents possibly present in the liquid nitrogen
used for vitriﬁcation, or from other potentially infected
neighbor samples during storage. Open systems have been
debated for the hypothetical cross-contamination risk. However, no reports on this matter (63) exist after a 30-year history of cryotransfers in assisted reproduction or after 10
years of experience using open devices for vitriﬁcation in
IVF clinics worldwide. A variety of vitriﬁcation tools and protocols exists on the market, which have been applied with
varying degrees of success. Although, open systems have
been the preferred oocytes vitriﬁcation method, closed

198
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
systems were not as successful for oocytes as open devices,
especially when oocyte vitriﬁcation is applied in routine clinical practice. Closed systems have lately evolved and a recent
prospective clinical trial has revealed that oocytes vitriﬁed in
hermetic systems show similar clinical efﬁciency to their sibling fresh oocytes (64). Another randomized sibling-oocyte
study compared an open versus closed system and conﬁrmed
the efﬁciency of the latter (65).

Efﬁcacy and safety of oocyte cryopreservation
for FP
Data on EFP strategy efﬁciency are emerging, but are still
scarce mainly due to the intrinsic nature of FP. Fertility preservation implies an indeterminate time elapsing from oocyte
vitriﬁcation until women decide to use them, as they feel
ready for motherhood and have overcome the personal drawbacks that initially led them to freeze the oocytes. A study (48)
from 2013 provides information on the ﬁrst babies born after
elective freezing of oocytes for nonmedical reasons.
A more recent study (58) provides extensive information
on outcomes after EFP, including the proﬁle of the women
who had their oocytes vitriﬁed, the rate at which they return
to use them, their clinical outcomes, and the probability of
having a baby according to the number of used oocytes. Unlike other publications that evaluate the efﬁciency of egg
freezing in different populations, basically in egg donors or
poor responders, this study (58) includes the largest series to
date from actual FP populations, and provides demographic
and clinical data of the women who underwent EFP
(N ¼ 1,468) and returned to attempt pregnancy (N ¼ 137).
As expected, most women who came to vitrify their oocytes were single (75.6%) and professionals with a high level
of education (72.8%), which coincide with the essential motivations described for this population (58). Most of these
women decided on EFP at advanced age as most (63%)
decided FP when they were aged 37–40 years. A nonnegligible 16.2% were aged R40 years when they decided
on vitriﬁcation, and most were aged <30 years (58). It is striking that the age of the women who underwent EFP matched
that of those who traditionally came to IVF clinics to treat
infertility problems. This is a contradiction because the fundamentals of FP consist in preserving fertility and not preserving infertility. Consequently, when analyzing the results
obtained in this ‘‘aged freezers’’ population, we found that
age played a fundamental role in achieving success by this
strategy. Not surprisingly, the mean oocyte storage time
was short (2.1 years), probably because these women decided
on FP at advanced reproductive ages. Thus, they could not
‘‘buy’’ as much time as if they had been younger when
deciding on FP.
As expected, age at vitriﬁcation strongly impacts the
outcome regarding the number of retrieved oocytes and the
metaphase II oocytes ﬁnally vitriﬁed, the survival of the oocytes, pregnancy and live birth rates. The ﬁrst effect of age
is shown by the many oocytes either retrieved or vitriﬁed in
patients aged %35 years compared with patients aged >35
years (58). The lowest amount of mean retrieved was for
patients aged R40 years (5.1; 95% conﬁdence interval:

4.2–6.0) and 3.9 (95% conﬁdence interval: 2.6–5.0) for
mean metaphase II oocytes vitriﬁed. This obeys the natural
ovarian reserve depletion.
The oocyte survival rate is also age related. Table 2 (58)
shows higher survival and live birth rate per patient for the
women aged %35 years. That the survival of oocytes is lower
in older patients is clearly relevant as these women have fewer
oocytes to cope with the whole process, which may undermine cycle prognosis. Accordingly, pregnancy rates (PRs)
and cumulative live birth rates (CLBR) worsen as patient’
age increases (Table 2) (58). A more stratiﬁed analysis showed
differences in terms of CLBR between the youngest and oldest
women (66.3% [95% conﬁdence interval: 35.8%–97.4%] vs.
13.3% [95% conﬁdence interval: 3.9%–30.5%] with ongoing
PRs for patients aged %29 years vs. R40 years, respectively)
(P< .05).
When preserving fertility, perhaps the ﬁrst question
women ask is how many oocytes they should vitrify to
maximize their chances of giving birth. The CLBR calculation per patient according to age shows that age strongly affects outcomes, but neither explains the pace at which rates
lower nor considers the number of oocytes needed to have a
child. Conversely, calculating survival curves by the KaplanMeier approach is a much more accurate method to know
the probability of having a baby at any point on the curve
according to the number of used oocytes when considering
the most powerful confounder (i.e., patient’s age). Perceptibly, the more oocytes, the greater the probability, but the
relationship is not linear. For women aged %35 years, we
observed a huge difference in CLBR when using only ﬁve
(15.4%) versus eight oocytes (40.8%), which is an 8.4% increase in CLBR per additional oocyte. However, if aged
R36 years, the increase in CLBR is considerably less marked
when using the same number of oocytes (from 5.1% CLBR
using 5 oocytes to 19.9% with 8; a 4.9% increase in
CLBR). The success rate in the younger group (%35 years)
was twice that achieved in the older group (R36 years;
60.5% vs. 29.7%, respectively) when using 10 oocytes.
With 15 oocytes, CLBR continues to increase in the %35year group, but the women aged R36 years reach the
plateau for the same number of oocytes. Thus, success at
this point is independent of the number of used oocytes.
Accordingly, we suggest vitrifying 8–10 metaphase II oocytes to obtain reasonable success rates. In women >36
years, the number of oocytes need to be individualized,
along with the possibility of offering preimplantation genetic screening. This leads to a debate about costeffectiveness as recent data reveal that egg banking for FP
is more cost-effective in women aged <38 years (66, 67).
Although both arguments are valid, we believe it necessary to provide very young and older women with adequate
information. The former should be enlightened about them
being less likely to use their stored oocytes in the future as
natural conception is more probable. Although older women
are more likely to use their vitriﬁed oocytes, they should be
accurately informed about their fewer reproductive chances.
As we revealed, some women who did EFP aged <40 years
gave birth, which makes it very difﬁcult to set upper limits
to apply the strategy.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
199
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

TABLE 2
Clinical outcome according to age at vitriﬁcation.
Variable
No. of patients
No. of cycles
Age, mean  SD
No. of inseminated
oocytes, mean  SD
Survival rate
Clinical pregnancy rate
No. of live births
CLBR/cycle
CLBR/patient

Oocyte donation

Poor responder, £35

Poor responder, >35

Elective FP, £35

Elective FP, >35

15,899*
18,579
25.3  2.2a **
(25.2–25.3)
11.4  2.1a
(11.3–11.4)
92.3 %a (92.2–93.4)
59.3%a (58.6–60.0)
11,445
61.6%a (60.9–62.3)
71.9%a (71.2 -62.6)

316
332
33.3  1.4b
(33.2–33.5)
7.5  4.2b
(7.3–7.7)
83.6%b, d (81.7–85.6)
b
38.7% (32.5–44.9)
164
50-4%b (44.9–55.8)
51.8%b (42.3–57.3)

648
680
38.6  1.5c
(38.5–38.7)
6.8  1.5c
(6.7–6.9)
84.9%b (83.6–86.2)
c
30.6 (27.1–34.1)
208
30.6%c (27.1–34.0)
32.1c (28.5–35.7)

101
108
32.5  2.8b
(31.9–33.1)
10.3  3.7d
(10.2–10.4)
94.7%a (93.3–96.1)
63.3a (53.9–72.7)
67
62.0%a (52.9–71.2)
66.3%a (57.1–75.5)

425
504
38.7  1.0c
(38.6–38.8)
8.6  1.4e
(8.5–8.7)
82.2%c,d (81.0–83.4)
33.9c (29.4–38.4)
122
24.4c (20.7–28.2)
28.7c (24.4–33.0)

Note: CLBR ¼ cumulative live birth rate; FP ¼ fertility preservation, SD ¼ standard deviation. Numbers in parentheses are 95% conﬁdence intervals. Different superscripts indicate statistical
differences (P< .05).
*Recipients.
**Donors age.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

We believe that our ﬁndings (58) are most revealing
when considering the very relevant fact that data were obtained from analyzing the results in women who actually
did EFP. Other studies have addressed the factors that may
inﬂuence EFP outcome through oocyte vitriﬁcation and
have predicted birth probabilities by studying other populations using vitriﬁed, or even fresh, oocytes. A recent study
(68) focused on developing a model to predict the likelihood
of live birth according to age in EFP, but using fresh oocytes
cycles. Live birth predictions were provided by considering
the proportion of euploid blastocysts and the number of oocytes needed to generate them according to age. A metaanalysis (69) with 10 studies of oocyte cryopreservation by
slow freezing/vitriﬁcation indicated fewer probabilities of
giving birth as age increased, irrespective of the technique
used, but better outcomes with vitriﬁcation. In it, rates gradually lowered between the ages of 25 and >40 years, with a
cutoff point between success and failure in live birth set at
36 years. However, it also conﬁrmed that a child can be
achieved even at 42 or 44 years of age (69). Cil et al. (69)
tabulated the live birth probabilities for 25- to 42-yearolds according to the number of oocytes thawed, injected,
or to embryos transferred.
Undoubtedly these tools can be useful, especially for EFP,
as casuistry is very small. However, they can lead to inaccuracy as they assume that all populations behave similarly in
survival and clinical outcome terms. Conversely, we found
relevant differences between infertile young women and
young women undergoing EFP. Table 3 shows the data of
three populations using vitriﬁed oocytes (i.e., recipients of donors’ oocytes, poor responders, and EFP patients). The survival of oocytes, number of inseminated oocytes, and
clinical PRs and live birth rates are provided. Data on oocyte
donation cycles (N ¼ 15,899; 18,579 cycles) and poor responders (N ¼ 964; 1,012 cycles) were collected from 20122017, and the data from actual EFP patients cover the past
10 years (N ¼ 526; 612 cycles). The results were calculated according to age (%35 and R36 years) in poor responders and
EFP. In the ovum donation group, donor age was tabulated
(25.3  3.2 years) and clinical data were obtained from recipients (mean age, 41.5  3.2 years). We may reasonably expect

comparable results in matching age groups. It is striking that
survival and clinical outcomes (clinical and live birth rates)
were worse for poor responders (%35 years) than the oocyte
donation and young EFP %35 years groups (Table 3). The
young EFP group mirrored the outcomes of the donor oocyte
group. With a similar number of inseminated oocytes (11.4 
2.1 and 10.3  3.7), clinical PR (59.3% and 63.3%) and live
birth (71.9% and 66.3%) rates were comparable (P>.05) for
oocyte donors and EFP %35 years, respectively. Survival
rates were similar for donor oocytes (92.3%) and EFP %35
years (94.7%). Noticeably, survival in poor responders was
comparable between young and older women, but clinical
outcome was signiﬁcantly higher for patients aged %35
years. As expected, the results were comparable between old
(R36 years) poor responders and EFP patients of the same
age, with fewer oocytes inseminated in poor responders
compared with EFP groups but, as expected, clinical outcomes
where higher for younger poor responders (CLBR, 50.4% vs.
30.6% for %35 and R36 years, respectively). The behavior
of the young poor responder group could be explained by
them being infertile patients with compromised ovarian
reserve and a good likelihood of having compromised oocyte
quality. Therefore, they have fewer and lower-quality oocytes
despite being young, which are responsible for the impaired
results. Hence, the overall picture in Table 3 shows that differential outcomes exist according to age and populations. The
young EFP group mirrors the outcomes achieved in the gold
standard group (i.e., donors oocytes’ reinforce our recommendation that women considering EFP would be better off
deciding to do this at a younger age).
In conclusion, the efﬁciency of oocyte vitriﬁcation to
safeguard fertility is currently a consolidated option. However, we believe that it is mandatory to explain to women
who seek EFP that oocyte cryostorage is not an insurance
policy to secure future motherhood, but a means to increase
their chances of having a biological child. These chances
depend on age and the number of stored oocytes. The number of vitriﬁed oocytes should be adjusted according to patient’s age to increase the probability of having a child,
irrespective of oocytes coming from one stimulation cycle
or more. In women, undergoing EFP should be encouraged

200
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

(20.7–28.2)
(24.4–33.0)
122 (24.4)c
122 (28.7)c

to decide on this option when aged <35 years because of
greater biological efﬁciency.

THE OFTEN-OVERLOOKED
EMBRYO TRANSFER
Jason E. Swain, Ph.D., and
William B. Schoolcraft, M.D.
Assisted reproductive technology (ART) has seen several advancements in the laboratory to improve embryo development, including custom embryo culture platforms,
incubators, and culture media. Integration of genetics with
blastocyst biopsy and preimplantation genetic diagnosis/preimplantation genetic screening have helped improve embryo
selection. Technological advancements have also beneﬁted
the clinical side of ART, with implementation and improvements in ultrasound, reﬁnement of gonadotropins, and hormone stimulation with a variety of stimulation protocols
customized to the individual patient.
One area that seems to receive less attention, but is arguably as important as any step in the IVF process, is ET. Even
with the best embryos, without an atraumatic transfer to the
correct location inside the uterine cavity, production of a
live birth is impossible.
In comparison to other advances in the IVF laboratory
and clinic, relatively few advances have occurred with ET.
Production of specialized catheters have likely helped ease
the process of ET. Improvements in ultrasound have also
likely aided placement of the embryo into the uterus. However, when controlling for embryo quality and other variables,
the physician has a dramatic impact on the success of the
ET procedure (70). Physician technique and even response
in the face of unforeseen occurrences during ET are key factors in success. Examples of difﬁcult transfers, retained embryos, malfunctioning syringes, or other mishaps can be
recounted; many with happy endings due to the actions of
the doctor. Use of an ET training simulator (71) and development of a simulator by the American Society for Reproductive
Medicine (ASRM) may further aid physician training in this
delicate process. Critical aspects required for optimized ET
are discussed.

Key considerations for successful ET

Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

Note: CLBR ¼ cumulative live birth rate; CI ¼ conﬁdence interval; NA ¼ not available. Superscript letters indicate statistical differences (P>.05).
* Recipients.
y
Donor age.

(44.9–55.8)
(42.3–57.3)
164 (50.4)b
164 (51.8)b
11,445 (61.6)a
11,445 (71.9)a

(60.9–62.3)
(71.2–62.6)

208 (30.6)c
208 (32.1)c

(27.1–34.0)
(28.5–35.7)

67 (62.0)a
67 (66.3)a

(52.9–71.2)
(57.1–75.5)

(81.0–83.4)
(29.4–38.4)
82.2c,d
33.9c
(93.3–96.1)
(53.9–72.7)
94.7a
63.3a
(83.6–86.2)
(27.1–34.1)
(81.7–85.6)
(32.5–44.9)
83.6b,d
38.7b

No. of patients
No. of cycles
Mean age (y)
(mean  SD
No. of oocytes
inseminated
(mean  SD)
Survival rate (%)
Clinical pregnancy
rate (%)
CLBR/cycle (%)
CLBR/patient (%)

92.3a
59.3a

(92.2–93.4)
(58.6–60.0)

84.9b
30.6c

(8.5–8.7)
4,445 (8.6  1.4)e
(7.3–7.7)
2,438 (7.5  4.2)b
(11.3–11.4)
212,620 (11.4  2.1)a

4,403 (6.8  1.5)c

(6.7–6.9)

1,087 (10.3  3.7)d

(10.2–10.4)

NA
NA
(38.6–38.8)
425
504
38.7  1.0c
101
108
32.5  2.8b
NA
NA
(38.5–38.7)
NA
NA
(33.2–33.5)
316
332
33.3  1.4b
NA
NA
(25.2–25.3)
15,899*
18,579
25.3  2.2ay

648
680
38.6  1.5c

95% CI
95% CI
95% CI

‡36 y
£35 y
Outcome variable

NA
NA
(31.9–33.1)

95% CI
95% CI

‡36 y
£35 y

Poor responders
Poor responders
Oocyte donation

Survival and clinical outcome in three populations.

TABLE 3

Elective fertility
preservation patients

Elective fertility
preservation patients

Fertility and Sterility®

Catheter/embryo placement. Proper placement of the catheter tip is an important variable affecting ET outcome.
Although avoidance of touching the fundus when performing
a transfer is widely accepted as a critical component, the ideal
location of catheter/embryo placement is less clear. Several
studies have determined that the distance from the catheter
tip to the fundus was a variable affecting outcome. When
the catheter tip was 5–27 mm from the fundus, pregnancy
rates (PRs) were higher than when the catheter was closer.
Furthermore, ectopic pregnancy rates (EPRs) were lower
with this lower cavity transfer (72). The position of the air
bubble transferred at the time of ET and its relation to PR
has shown similar results.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
201
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
The recent ASRM Practice Committee Guidelines for
performing ET indicates that there is fair evidence from
randomized controlled trials and cohort studies to indicate
that catheter placement impacts implantation and pregnancy (73). Proper catheter location at the time of transfer can be summarized as follows. Embryos placed too
high in the cavity may increase the probability of endometrial trauma and may induce uterine contractions
with potential adverse effects. Upper or midcavity transfers, >10 mm from the fundus, appear to optimize implantation by avoiding the lower cavity where
implantation is compromised or cervical implantation
can occur and avoids issues associated with transfer too
close to the fundus.
Ultrasound. In a retrospective comparison (74), 4,807 ETs
were examined noting the degree of difﬁculty. Easy or intermediate transfers resulted in a 1.7-fold higher PR than difﬁcult transfers (P< .0001, 95% conﬁdence interval: 1.3–2.2).
In a meta-analysis (75), it was found that ultrasound guidance
lowered the incidence of difﬁcult ETs with an odds ratio of
0.55. Thus, avoiding difﬁcult ET is important to optimize clinical outcomes and ultrasound guidance appears to be key tool
in achieving this goal.
Contamination of the catheter with blood may be a
marker for difﬁcult ET and has also been linked to poor ET
outcomes, although with mixed data. When retrospectively
assessing outcomes, various studies have shown higher success rates when no blood was noted on the catheter compared
with transfer with blood present.
Ultrasound has many beneﬁts related to ET, such as
lowering the incidence of difﬁcult transfers, conﬁrming
catheter placement in the correct part of the fundal cavity,
minimizing contamination of the catheter tip with blood
and mucous, and decreasing the chance of traumatizing
the fundus and stimulating uterine contractions. Compared
with ‘‘clinical touch,’’ several randomized controlled trials
and meta-analyses have conﬁrmed signiﬁcant improvement in clinical PRs with ultrasound guidance. The
ASRM practice guidelines for ET ﬁnd evidence to recommend the use of ultrasound during ET to improve clinical
PRs and live birth rates (73). Transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasound appear to be similarly effective in terms
of pregnancy outcome (76).
Catheter types. Several catheters are available for use during
ET. Catheters may vary in packaging, length, diameter, and
echogenic visibility. However, classiﬁcation generally depends on two categories: soft and stiff.
Soft catheters may follow the contour of the endometrial cavity more easily and thereby result in less risk of
endometrial trauma or plugging the catheter tip. The negative aspect of soft catheters is that they are more difﬁcult
to insert and pass. Nevertheless, a meta-analysis (77) revealed improved outcomes (odds ratio: 1.34) favoring soft
catheters versus stiff ones. In some cases, insertion of the
catheter is difﬁcult due to cervical stenosis. Different approaches have been undertaken to alleviate this issue,
including cervical dilation at the time of retrieval.

However, this has been found to lower subsequent PRs.
Dilation has also been accomplished several weeks before
ET and has been found to improve outcomes. A malleable
stylet device can be used with some soft catheters to negotiate a difﬁcult internal os. Use of this device compared
with a soft catheter alone did not decrease clinical PRs
or implantation rates. When using the malleable stylet, it
is important to leave the outer sheath just proximal to
the internal os.
Catheter loading. Loading of preimplantation embryos into
the transfer catheter is a critical component of the ET process
with various considerations. As a result, types of catheters
and syringes, and how these items are handled are important
considerations
Although various studies examined the different types
of ET catheters, relatively few publications discuss syringes used for ET. Three main options exist for transfer
syringes. These include 1-mL glass Hamilton syringes,
1-mL rubber-free syringes, and 1-mL syringes with rubber
stoppers. No clear advantage of one syringe over another
has been demonstrated, although key factors should be
considered before selection of a particular device. Considerations often include the preference for amount of resistance when depressing the plunger and the type of
plunger with regard to toxicity concerns. Rubber plungers
have historically been associated with increased risk of
toxicity. Although glass Hamilton syringes have been
used historically, these reusable devices require sterilization between cases and can wear out over time. Regardless of the syringe type used, an appropriate bioassay is
recommended before clinical implementation to rule out
embryo toxicity.
Rinsing of the catheter before loading embryos for transfer is often recommended to remove any substances or debris
that may be present inside the catheter. This prevents their
deposition into the uterus.
Once catheter type and syringe type are selected, and
catheters are prepped, various methods of loading embryos are available. Much debate exists over the impact
of air in the ET catheter. Air bubbles can help with ultrasound visualization, and may play a role is proper placement of the embryo (78). Concern exists with possible
migration of embryos caused by air bubbles in the uterus
after transfer, although this concern may be unfounded
(79). Various studies, including a meta-analysis (80), revealed no clear advantage of the ﬂuid-air catheter
loading method versus models using only ﬂuid in terms
of pregnancy, implantation, miscarriage, EP, or live birth
(Fig. 4).
Volume of media in the catheter may be an important
factor when using air bubbles. With day 2 or 3 ET, using
more ﬂuid ﬂanked by bubbles yielded superior pregnancy
and implantation than smaller ﬂuid volumes (81, 82).
Transfer medium. In early reports of factors associated
with high PRs, use of 50% patient serum in the transfer
medium was noted to yield higher outcomes than 10%
serum (83). It was assumed that this may be due to

202
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 4

Common methods of ET catheter loading. Syringe and catheter types
may vary. No clear advantage exists of one loading technique over
another. Careful considerations should be given to the size of air
bubbles, the amount and type of medium used for ET. Shading
indicates ﬂuid; white indicates air. Gray circles represent embryos.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

increased protein content and resulting higher colloid osmotic pressure of the transfer medium being more similar
to uterine ﬂuid and the resulting impact on embryo migration in the uterus.
Subsequent studies have identiﬁed that supplementation
of the medium used for ET may impact outcomes, possibly
by impact of the uterine environment. The ET medium containing 0.5 mg/mL of hyaluronan was shown to beneﬁt
mouse implantation and fetal development compared with
transfer medium without hyaluronan, possibly by facilitation of rapid diffusion of catheter contents to the uterine
lumen due to ﬂuid characteristics. A Cochrane review (84)
of 16 studies indicates that moderate quality data exist to
indicate that use of adherence compounds like hyaluronan
in ET medium for humans can improve clinical pregnancy
and live birth. However, conﬂicting data exist and it is unclear whether the use of hyaluronan with ET medium is
beneﬁcial versus the use of a transfer medium with an
elevated protein content.
Although not necessarily placed into the uterus at the
same time as the embryo, infusion of hCG into the uterine
cavity immediately before ET has been reported to improve
outcomes. Subsequent prospective randomized controlled trials failed to ﬁnd any beneﬁt. A Cochrane review (85) of 12 trials found that due to variability in the data, current ﬁndings
do not support the use of hCG infusion into the uterine cavity
before ET. Factors, such as timing and amount of hCG, may be
important considerations.
Transfer velocity. The speed of the embryo-ﬂuid injection
into the uterus could also be a variable in ET outcome.

In a study by Grygoruk et al. (86), a mock transfer was
accomplished using mouse embryos with either a fast injection or a slow injection speed. Embryos in both groups
were compared with control embryos where no ET was
accomplished. The percentage of embryos that were
shrunken and/or collapsed increased in the rapid injection
group. In addition, rates of apoptosis in the embryos of
the rapid injection group were increased. Thus, embryo
trauma may be related to the rapidity of injection and
care should be taken to inject the ﬂuid as slowly as
possible. In addition, in vitro modeling suggests that rapid
injection may lead to embryo placement issues and possibly
promote EPs (78).
Timing. The timing surrounding ET may also be involved in
success. Matorras et al. (87) demonstrated that the interval
between catheter loading and the discharge of the embryos
into the cavity affected IVF outcomes. When this delay was
>120 seconds, there was a decrease in PRs from 31.6% to
19.1% and a decrease in implantation rate from 15.9% to
9.4%. This may be related to how long the embryos are
outside the incubator and experiencing environmental
stress. The delay in injection might be a surrogate marker
as well for the difﬁculty of ET, as these variables were
not separated. Nevertheless, minimizing the time between
loading and transfer would seem to be appropriate. The inﬂuence of the time interval before withdrawal of the catheter after ET has also been investigated, but no differences
in clinical outcome have been seen.
The decision of when to transfer embryos is also an
important factor in the performance in the procedure. There
is growing evidence of impaired endometrial receptivity during fresh IVF cycles due to the controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) medications and the altered hormonal
stimulation of the uterine lining. Shapiro et al. (88) were
one of the ﬁrst to demonstrate that frozen ET cycles signiﬁcantly improved ongoing PRs and implantation rates
compared with fresh transfers. There has also been more
recent evidence of improved obstetric outcomes with frozen
versus fresh transfers.
Progesterone. Fresh ET occurs after COH. The combination of GnRH agonist and follicle aspiration, which can
deplete granulosa cells (GCs), results in a P deﬁciency
in the luteal phase. The role of P supplementation in fresh
ET has been extensively studied. A large meta-analysis by
van der Linden et al. (89) found that comparing P with
no treatment, its administration for luteal phase support
signiﬁcantly increased the live birth rate (odds ratio:
2.95).
Improvements in cryopreservation and the expanded
use of chromosomal screening of embryos at the blastocyst
stage have led to an increased use of frozen ETs. The two
main approaches to preparing the endometrium for frozen
ET include the natural cycle or an estrogen (E)/P-supplemented (programmed) cycle. A meta-analysis (90) of 20
studies found no differences in clinical PRs or live birth
rates between natural frozen ET cycles and programmed
cycles.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
203
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

TABLE 4
Elements for successful ET.
Goal
Easy, atraumatic transfer
Proper placement
Minimize embryo stress
Negotiate a difﬁcult/stenotic cervix
Optimize implantation, minimize contractions

Key approaches
Trial transfer, ultrasound, soft catheter
Inject slowly 1.5 cm from fundus, conﬁrmed by ultrasound
Minimize transfer time, catheter loading, control temperature/pH, careful injection
Before cycle luminaria or dilation, malleable stylet, ultrasound
Blastocyst transfer, frozen ET, avoid trauma to cervix or fundus

Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

With regard to programmed cycles, the main variables are
the timing of the start of P and the route of administration. A
Cochrane Database Review (91) of prospective randomized
trials concluded that transferring blastocysts on the 5th or
6th day of P results in a signiﬁcantly higher PR (odds ratio:
1.87; 95% conﬁdence interval: 1.13–3.08) than if P was
started a day earlier (day 4) or a day later (day 7). This study
also found that vaginal and IM P resulted in equivalent clinical PRs (odds ratio: 1.07; 95% conﬁdence interval: 0.61–
1.89), although more recent assessments may contradict this
ﬁnding.
Endometrial injury. A Cochrane review (92) of 14 randomized controlled trials indicates that moderate quality evidence indicates that endometrial injury performed
between day 7 of the previous cycle and day 7 of the ET
cycle is associated with an improvement in live birth rates
and clinical PRs in women with more than two prior failed
ETs. There is no evidence of an effect on miscarriage, multiple pregnancy, or bleeding. Importantly, endometrial
injury on the day of oocyte retrieval is associated with a
reduction of clinical rates and ongoing PRs and may also
reinforce the importance of an atraumatic ET and avoidance
of endometrial injury close to the time of ET. Although current evidence suggests some beneﬁt of endometrial injury,
additional studies are required with stringent controls and
improved patient stratiﬁcation.
Bedrest. After ET, bedrest has been a controversial subject,
with some investigators recommending extended bedrest
and others, virtually none. Recent studies (93, 94), including
a meta-analysis, have failed to demonstrate a clear improvement in ongoing pregnancy with bedrest after ET and some
researchers have indicated a possible a detrimental effect of
bedrest. Thus, although individualizing recommendations
for patients’ preferences and anxiety, bedrest after ET has
no proven beneﬁt.
In conclusion, attention to detail and adherence to key
factors are critical to optimize transfer of a preimplantation
embryo to the uterus (Table 4). The performance of an
atraumatic ET is essential to IVF success. Ultrasound guidance appears to be one adjunct that maximizes the chance
for a successful ET. The delivery of embryos 1.0–2.0 cm
from the fundus using a soft catheter yields optimal implantation rates. Catheter loading is important, and
although air bubbles are useful, no single technique appears
to be superior to another. The inclusion of hyaluronan in

the ET media appears to have beneﬁt for implantation.
Soft catheters appear to improve outcomes compared with
stiff catheters. There is no evidence that bedrest signiﬁcantly improves pregnancy or live birth. Due to the adverse
effects of COH on the endometrium, frozen ETs have
demonstrated improved PRs as well as better obstetric
outcomes.

TOWARD SINGLE
EMBRYO TRANSFER
Rene Frydman, M.D.
At inception of assisted reproductive technology, around
1980, each pioneer IVF center used the natural cycle as the
standard protocol. Progression of the dominant follicle was
followed by daily measurements of LH in plasma or urine
for identifying the preovulatory LH surge. Oocyte retrieval
was performed by laparoscopy, which succeeded in barely
60%–70% of cases.
To solve this problem and increase the IVF yield,
ovarian stimulation (OS) was proposed, using clomiphene
citrate ﬁrst and then hMG. Later, the availability of GnRH
agonists allowed us to prevent the risk of premature ovulation, which greatly improved the physician’s ﬂexibility for
managing OS.
Before embryo freezing became available—in 1984—all
or nearly all embryos obtained through OS were transferred to maximize the then dismal pregnancy rates. Failures still outnumbered successes, yet multiple pregnancy
nonetheless at times occurred, particularly in younger
women. The majority of infertility doctors, often not being
involved in obstetrical care, tended to be oblivious of the
complications emanating from multiple pregnancies.
Therefore, it logically was the pediatricians who ﬁrst
blew the whistle about this novel epidemic of multiple
pregnancies, accompanied at times by severe prematurity
and catastrophic complications, such as mental retardation. Consequently, following Alan Trounson’s and Linda
Moorh’s pioneering work in embryo freezing, the majority
of teams elected to freeze excess embryos. Still, most physicians transferred two or three embryos to optimize pregnancy rates.
Numerous meetings took place to alert IVF practitioners
to this growing concern and to attempt to curb the

204
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
incidence of twin and high-order multiple pregnancies. A
randomized trial published by Jan Gerris’s group (95)
described the characteristics of high-quality embryos as
having four to ﬁve blastomeres on day 2 and at least seven
on day 3 after insemination and <20% of anucleated fragments. Embryos that fulﬁlled these criteria had implantation rates of 42.3%.
These data were conﬁrmed a year later by a publication
showing that elective single ET (eSET) on day 3 markedly
reduced the twining rate (96). Two years later, it was suggested that eSET can be proposed for women <36 years of
age at the ﬁrst or second treatment cycle when a topquality embryo is available (97).
In 2000, the European Society of Human Reproduction
and Embryology declared that a twin pregnancy rate of
R25% is unacceptable. The target objective was a twin pregnancy rate of approximately 10% and no triple pregnancy.
‘‘Get the number of babies you want, but one at a time’’ was
the motto.
Sweden, Belgium, and the United Kingdom updated their
legislation to impose eSET on all women except those who
had suffered two failed assisted reproductive technology cycles or were over 39 years of age. The policy is thus based
on the biologist’s ability to identify a top-quality embryo.
Different culture media were proposed to facilitate the
development of embryos to the blastocyst stage. The idea

was to select out embryos that had a better chance of implanting by eliminating those that arrested on day 3. Classiﬁcation
of blastocysts offers an opportunity for the biologist to select
out the best ones. More recently, effort has been devoted to
using time-lapse images of embryo development, although
we are still awaiting the ﬁnal proof of efﬁcacy of this
approach.
A different approach has consisted of looking at the genetic composition of the developing embryo through preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy. Although
extremely promising, this approach is still being tested for
the risk of damage caused to the developing embryo. Alternate options are similarly being pursued for validating noninvasive genetic testing. More recently, the mitochondrial
endowment of the embryo has also been looked at, but this
is still controversial.
In conclusion, promoting and identifying embryos
with high developmental potential are primary goals
for the years to come. Without ignoring the endometrium, it appears that fostering the achievement of
top-quality embryos should help avoid unrelenting OS
strategies leading to the freezing of excessive numbers
of embryos that may never be used. The eSET objective
is dependent on our ability to identify top-quality embryos that have high implantation and developmental
potential.

TECHNIQUES DEVELOPED FROM IVF
IVF FROM INCUBATION
TO INJECTION
Lauren A. Bishop, M.D., Davora Aharon, M.D.,
Catherine Gordon, M.D., Erika New, M.D., and
Alan Decherney, M.D.
Tremendous advancements have been made in the ﬁeld of
assisted reproductive technology (ART) over the past 40
years. Laboratory techniques have evolved, allowing for
far greater precision and improvements in patient care
as well as outcomes. Culture media have improved,
enabling fertilization to occur in vitro and the transfer
of embryos to occur at the blastocyst stage. The treatment
of male factor infertility has evolved, with much higher
fertilization rates seen with the development of intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). Patients are also exposed to
fewer operating risks as we have transitioned from laparoscopic to transvaginal procedures. Here, we will discuss
the necessary steps along the way to the current state of
IVF.

GAMETE INTRAFALLOPIAN TRANSFER
Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT) is a fertility technique in
which both oocytes and sperm are placed directly into the fal-

lopian tube, allowing for IVF to occur. The technique was
shown to be successful in primates in 1980 and was ﬁrst
offered to humans at a religious-afﬁliated hospital in Dayton,
Ohio, in 1983 as an alternative to IVF (98). Shortly thereafter,
the ﬁrst successful pregnancy conceived through GIFT
occurred in 1984.
Patients treated using GIFT underwent routine ovarian
stimulation, and oocyte retrieval was performed by laparoscopy or minilaparotomy. Postretrieval, up to four mature
oocytes were drawn into a catheter followed by sperm,
while allowing for air space between the two media to
ensure fertilization did not occur until the media were
placed in the fallopian tube (98). The catheter was then laparoscopically passed through the ﬁmbriae and advanced to
the ampullary portion of the fallopian tube where the gametes were injected (98). Meirow and Schenker demonstrated
the passage of four oocytes resulted in a 28% pregnancy
rate (99). Transferring additional oocytes did not increase
pregnancy rates, only the risk of multiples up to 31% (99).
In 1995, GIFT was performed in 13.5% of ART cycles
worldwide (99). Despite the manipulation of the fallopian
tube that occurs with catheterization, ectopic pregnancy rates
were similar between GIFT and IVF, 5.5% and 5.54%, respectively (99). Beneﬁts of GIFT included decreased cost and a
more physiologic environment for fertilization. It was also
an option for those with religious beliefs, which precluded

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
205
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 5

Percentages of transfers using frozen or fresh nondonor embryos that resulted in pregnancies, live births, and single-infant live births, 2015.
Reproduced from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (103).
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

them from using IVF. However, if pregnancy was not
achieved, patients would require additional stimulated cycles,
thus increasing the overall cost compared with IVF cycles
with embryo vitriﬁcation. In addition, GIFT required patency
of at least one fallopian tube and adequate sperm and posed
additional risks associated with surgery under general anesthesia (99).
Initially, pregnancy rates with GIFT exceeded those of
IVF, with a pregnancy rate of 33.9% with GIFT compared
with 19.1% with IVF (100). With advancements in IVF,
subsequent randomized trials showed the clinical pregnancy rate after GIFT was only 34%, compared with
50% after IVF (101). While GIFT is infrequently used
today, it is a unique technology that still may be requested
by patients, particularly those with religious objections to
IVF.

ZYGOTE INTRAFALLOPIAN TRANSFER
To circumvent concerns of poor fertilization with GIFT, a
procedure known as zygote intrafallopian transfer (ZIFT)
was introduced in the late 1980s. Oocytes were retrieved
laparoscopically or transvaginally, fertilized, and laparoscopically transferred directly into the fallopian tube. This
technique allowed providers to conﬁrm fertilization while
allowing early development and embryonic transport via
the fallopian tube.
ZIFT was limited by the need for an invasive laparoscopic procedure, imposing the risks associated with general anesthesia and abdominal surgery as well as
additional costs. As advancements were made in ultrasound, transvaginal follicle aspiration became the foremost

technique used for oocyte retrieval, allowing for a more
minimally invasive approach. Per the 1994 Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology data, GIFT and ZIFT had
higher pregnancy rates than IVF (28.7% and 29.1% vs.
21.1% per retrieval) (102). However, given the minimally
invasive approach of IVF, 78% of practitioners preferred
this method over tubal transfer of gametes or zygotes. By
2015, with improvements in IVF technology, IVF accounted for over 99% of ART procedures as the live birth
rate per transfer improved to 36.7% for fresh nondonor
embryos and 44.3% for frozen nondonor embryos (Fig. 5)
(103).
Current practice generally reserves the use of ZIFT for
difﬁcult ETs due to cervical stenosis or patients with recurrent
implantation failure (104). Results have been inconsistent on
the impact of ZIFT for implantation failure. Older studies have
demonstrated signiﬁcantly higher pregnancy rates in recurrent implantation failure patients using ZIFT compared with
IVF (104), however, IVF techniques have improved since
that time. While ZIFT currently accounts for <1% of all
ART conventionally performed, it may still have a role in a
select patient population.

SUBZONAL INSEMINATION
Micromanipulation techniques including partial zona dissection (PZD) and subzonal insemination (SUZI) were developed
in the 1980s to enhance the success of IVF in couples with
male factor infertility.
PZD facilitates sperm entry into the ooctye by creating
one or more holes in the zona pellucida. The hole was
created mechanically with a needle or chemically using

206
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
acidic Tyrode’s solution (105). Results of PZD were
initially promising in cases of male factor infertility,
with fertilization rates of 68% compared with 33% with
conventional insemination (105). However, the results
were inconsistent, and overall fertilization rates were low
in patients without prior IVF cycles. PZD resulted in a
rate of polyspermy of up to 57%, as the number of sperm
entering the perivitelline space could not be controlled
(105, 106).
SUZI was developed as a more direct method of fertilization. SUZI consists of inserting one or more spermatozoa
directly under the zona pellucida into the perivitelline space
(107, 108). This enabled the treatment of severe male factor
infertility, as well as decreased rates of polyspermy due to
control over the number of spermatozoa injected (108). It
has been demonstrated that up to four spermatozoa could be
injected without increasing the rate of polyspermy, while
injection of 5–10 sperm was associated with a 50% rate of
polyspermy (106). Initial studies reported fertilization rates
of 25%–71% with this technique (107). While this presented
an option for men with severe infertility who failed IVF,
overall clinical pregnancy rates remained low, at only 2.9%
of embryos transferred (109).
PZD and SUZI presented innovative potential solutions to
male factor infertility, however, their clinical application was
limited due to overall low success rates and elevated rates of
polyspermy. The advent of ICSI presented a technique with
improved outcomes, with the ﬁrst live birth using this procedure documented by Palermo et al. in 1992 (110). A randomized comparison found that ICSI doubled the fertilization
rate compared with SUZI (33% vs. 16%) and generated embryos in 83% compared with 50% of cycles (111). ICSI has
become the standard of care for patients with male factor
infertility, with fertilization rates of 60%–70%, similar to
rates of conventional insemination in men with normal
semen parameters (112). The use of ICSI in IVF cycles has
increased from 36.4% in 1996 to 76.2% in 2012 among fresh
IVF cycles and in 93.3% of cycles with male factor infertility
(113).
Despite the current lack of clinical use of PZD and
SUZI, these innovations were critical to the development
of ICSI, a technique whose use is now widespread and
crucial to the success of IVF in couples with male factor
infertility.
IVF has evolved dramatically over the past 40 years.
Although some of these pioneering techniques are rarely
used in current practice, each has been pivotal in historic advancements in the ﬁeld.

IN VITRO MATURATION
OF OOCYTES
Seang Lin Tan, M.D.
In vitro fertilization (IVF) is very successful, with cumulative live birth rates exceeding spontaneous conception in
fertile women (114). However, few people are aware that
in vitro maturation (IVM) of oocytes had in fact been re-

searched long before clinical IVF was established. IVM
was ﬁrst observed in rabbit oocytes by Pincus and Enzmann in 1935. Edwards focused on achieving meiotic
maturation of animal and human oocytes and then
achieving fertilization. Edwards remained an advocate of
IVM for the rest of his life. When the two of us founded
the London Women’s Clinic with Howard Jacobs and Stuart
Campbell, I recall him telling me that ‘‘If given a choice, no
patient would prefer to use hormonal medications,’’ and he
was a driving force behind the formation of the International Society of In Vitro Maturation of Oocytes.

DEFINITIONS
Today what actually constitutes IVM is controversial. Some
believe that stimulation of any kind, especially hCG priming,
negates the use of the term IVM. I think from a pragmatic clinical perspective any egg collection cycle, when the majority of
the oocytes are expected to be at the germinal vesicle (GV)
stage, could be named an IVM cycle. For research purposes,
IVM can be broken down into hormonally stimulated or unstimulated IVM (115).

HISTORY
Initial successful IVM cycles were reported by Cha in Korea
and Trounson in Australia in early 1990s. However, because
maturation and pregnancy rates through the 1990s were relatively low, IVM was rarely undertaken. In the mid-1990s, I recruited Ri Cheng Chian, who promised to produce a functional
IVM program if I could secure him $500,000 funding. We
started the program within a year. We were fortunate, and
our ﬁrst series of 25 patients had a maturation rate of 84%,
fertilization rate of 87%, and live birth rate of 40% (116).
While the norm was collecting immature oocytes without
any hormonal priming, I had decided to give hCG 10,000 IU
when the biggest follicle was <10 mm to time egg collection
(116), because Willis et al. had observed that granulosa cells
responded to LH once follicles reached 9–10 mm in ovulatory
women with normal or polycystic ovaries (PCOs), but anovulatory women with PCOs responded to LH even when follicles
were as small as 4 mm (117).
Our randomized controlled trial (118) showed that after
hCG priming, the eggs were all collected at the GV stage,
and after 24 hours the maturation rate to the metaphase II
(MII) stage was almost 75% in women given hCG compared
with 5% in women who were not given hCG. By 48 hours
of maturation, rates were 84% versus 69% in hCG and control
groups, respectively. These maturation rates have never been
exceeded since (118), although Sanchez et al. have achieved
maturation rates approaching these with preincubation culture using C-type natriuretic peptide (119). We preferred intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) for fertilization as we
believed that the zona was harder in women with IVM,
although subsequent studies have suggested that perhaps
conventional IVF may sufﬁce if semen analysis is normal.
From the earliest days it was quite clear that synchronization
of oocyte development and the endometrium was critical and
we used estrogen from the time of egg collection to accelerate

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
207
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
endometrial growth and P from the time of fertilization of the
embryos.
Fetal outcomes of IVM pregnancies are as good, and the
incidence of congenital malformations is no different from
that of pregnancies derived from IVF and spontaneous pregnancies in healthy women (120).
One secret that I realize years later accounts for our excellent results at the time was the meticulous nature of checking
the GV eggs several times a day. I recall Chian would email me
every couple of hours after egg retrieval to tell me when the
eggs had reached MII, and he would do ICSI soon after even
if it was the middle of night. The only other embryologist
who did this was Hai Ying Chen, and again we had extremely
high results. Most embryologists check the eggs only once
daily and fertilize them when they are at the MII stage. This
way, for instance, GV oocytes collected on a Monday morning
would be noted to be at the MII stage on Tuesday morning and
ICSI would be performed. It is possible that the eggs had
become MII stage by Monday night, but they are injected
with sperm many hours later, which could hamper their potential. Going forward, it could prove useful to culture GV
eggs in time-lapse imaging machines so that the precise
moment of becoming MII can be determined and fertilization
can be done soon after. In practice, it is easier to schedule IVM
egg collections in the early afternoon.
While IVM was almost exclusively reserved for women
with PCO or PCO syndrome (PCOS), over the next few years,
indications broadened to include poor responders who
declined egg donation, over-responders to ovarian stimulation for IVF (converting to IVM with early trigger and collection if over-response risking ovarian hyperstimulation
syndrome [OHSS] was evident after a few days of stimulation), egg donors who declined to have hormonal stimulation,
and those who had failed egg maturation in regular IVF (121).
One interesting indication was patients who had unexpectedly repeated poor embryo quality for no obvious reason. In
fact, our very ﬁrst successful IVM patient was a reproductive
endocrinology and infertility fellow in her early 30s. She produced almost all poor-quality embryos in three IVF cycles
with different stimulation protocols. In her ﬁrst IVM cycle
she produced a large number of good-quality embryos and
had a baby. Later on, she again produced almost all poorquality embryos in several top IVF programs in the Middle
East and Europe. She returned to Montreal, had goodquality embryos with IVM, and had a second baby. Since
then we have had a number of patients like her, and this
shows that there are a select group of patients who for some
unexplained reason do not do well with any stimulation protocol but are successful with IVM only.

CURRENT IVM PROTOCOL
We induce withdrawal bleed, measure the antral follicle
count, and repeat a second ultrasound scan when we estimate
the largest follicle to be 12–14 mm; then we give hCG 10,000
IU and perform oocyte retrieval 38 hours later. If the patient is
anovulatory, we give FSH 150 IU on days 4, 6, and 8. To synchronize the development of the eggs and endometrium, we
usually start administering E2 in a dose of 2 mg 3 times a

day from the time of egg collection and P from the time of
fertilization of the embryos. The dosage of estrogen depends
on the endometrial thickness (if the endometrial thickness is
<6 mm, 10–12 mg of E2 is given, if endometrial thickness
is between 6 and 8 mm, 8–10 mg of E2 is given in divided
doses). Although fresh ET can be done on day 3 or 5, recent
data suggest frozen ET in an artiﬁcial cycle is better. Walls
et al. (122) have shown that although the live birth rate per cycle started with fresh ET is lower with IVM than with IVF, the
live birth rate per cycle with frozen embryos with IVM or IVF
is comparable at over 30% per cycle (122).
In the last few years there have been a number of new
techniques of performing IVM egg collection. Dahan et al.
has described ‘‘rapid pass’’ technique, performed by passing
a 19-gauge single lumen oocyte aspiration needle through
the ovarian stroma, with constant suction (7.5 kPA) applied
(123). This technique involves collecting the visible follicles
ﬁrst; the oocyte collection needle is then passed repeatedly
through the ovarian stroma, while suction is applied
constantly for 3–5 minutes. In this case, the stroma may
appear devoid of follicles on ultrasound. Suction is maintained
while moving the needle through the long axis of the ovary,
while repeatedly changing the vertical path of collection to
have the needle tip pass through a signiﬁcant proportion of
the ovarian stroma. After 3–5 minutes of constant suction,
the needle is removed from the ovary and ﬂushed with heparinized saline to clear any possible blood clots. Using this technique, as many as 125 oocytes have been collected in a single
cycle (123). However, many of the oocytes retrieved were
extremely immature and did not mature well by conventional
IVM techniques. Recent advances by Evelyn Telfer and colleagues in Edinburgh in the in vitro growth of primordial follicles will hopefully improve this in the future (124).
Another innovation has been the introduction of a 19-G
single-channel pseudo double lumen needle by Steiner and
Tan, which has been shown in some studies to obtain superior
oocyte retrieval results (125).

POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS OF IVM
IVM in the era of antagonist protocol with
agonist trigger
Many IVF doctors feel that with GnRH agonist trigger in GnRH
antagonist cycles, there is no risk of OHSS and, therefore, no
need for IVM. In fact, although the risk of OHSS is signiﬁcantly
reduced, it is still present. Table 5 summarizes a few recent
studies showing that early severe OHSS can occur if there is
agonist trigger with low-dose hCG (1,500 IU) rescue, if there
is agonist trigger with high-dose estrogen and P supplementation for fresh ET, or even if there is agonist trigger and a freeze
all embryos policy. Only IVM can avoid OHSS totally.

IVM instead of natural cycle IVF
Natural cycle IVF involves no ovarian stimulation and trigger
at 18-mm follicle but is associated with 30% premature LH
surge and ovulation. Modiﬁed natural cycle IVF involves
starting daily GnRH antagonist and FSH injections once a follicle reaches 14 mm, until hCG trigger is given when the

208
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

TABLE 5
Summary of recent studies.
First author and
reference number

Title

Results

Seyhan (126)

Severe early OHSS following GnRH agonist trigger
with the addition of 1,500 IU hCG

Iliodromiti (127)

Consistent high clinical pregnancy rates and low OHSS
rats in high-risk patients after GnRHa triggering
and modiﬁed luteal support: a retrospective
multicentre study
Impact of GnRH agonist triggering and intensive luteal
steroid support on live-birth rates and OHSS: a
retrospective cohort study

Iliodromiti (128)

Fatemi (129)
Gurbuz (130)
Ling (131)

Severe OHSS after GnRH agonist trigger and ‘‘Freeze
all’’ approach in GnRH antagonist protocol
GnRH agonist and freeze all strategy does not prevent
severe OHSS: a report of three cases
GnRH agonist trigger and ovarian hyperstimulation
syndrome: relook at ‘‘freeze-all strategy’’

23 cycles GnRHa trigger þ 1,500 IU hCG 35 hours
later, luteal support, fresh ET; severe early onset
OHSS: 21.7% (5/23).
275 GnRHa triggered cycles þ 1,500 IU hCG luteal
phase. OHSS: total, 4.4%. Early onset, 2.6%: one
severe 0.72%; four moderate 1.5%; two mild
2.2%. Late onset, 1.8%: one severe and four mild.
363 GnRHa trigger þ intensive luteal support, and
fresh ET (Vietnamese population). One late onset
severe OHSS case; two early onset mild/moderate
OHSS cases with freeze all.
GnRH trigger no luteal hCG, freeze all; two cases of
severe OHSS.
GnRHa trigger, no luteal hCG, freeze all: three cases of
severe OHSS.
Severe OHSS reported in PCOS young woman
12 hours after oocyte pickup.

Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

leading follicle is 18 mm. Hence, there are typically three FSH
and three GnRH antagonist injections, and generally one MII
oocyte is retrieved with 15%–20% clinical pregnancy rate per
cycle started. In stimulated IVM, three injections of FSH are
given on days 4, 6, and 8, and hCG is given when the leading
follicle is 12–14 mm with no need for GnRH antagonist
administration. Several MII and many GV oocytes can be obtained to generate multiple blastocysts so that in a good IVM
program, a clinical pregnancy rate/cycle started of 45%–50%
can be obtained in women up to 37 years of age. Hence, I
believe that IVM should replace natural cycle or modiﬁed natural cycle IVF.

IVM instead of FSH/IUI
The ﬁrst line of treatment in many fertility programs is FSH
stimulation combined with IUI. This treatment requires
approximately eight to 10 daily injections of FSH and has a
pregnancy rate of 15%–20% and a multiple pregnancy rate
of 30% and costs about $2,000 in North America for medications and IUI. In comparison, IVM requires one (hCG) to four
injections (FSH days 4, 6, and 8 and hCG), followed by egg
collection when the biggest follicle is 10–14 mm followed
by ET and will yield a 45%–50% pregnancy rate and a 5%–
10% multiple pregnancy rate and costs $4,000 with no risk
of OHSS. Therefore, especially in countries where patients
begin attempting fertility treatment when they are relatively
young, IVM may in fact replace FSH and IUI as the ﬁrstline infertility treatment. Hatirnaz et al. have achieved a
35% live birth rate/cycle with elective single ET (132), and
unpublished data suggest similar results with letrozolestimulated IVM cycles.

IVM and fertility preservation
When presented with an oncology patient wanting fertility
preservation, we determine whether ovarian stimulation
can be safely performed and how long the patient can

wait before the start of chemotherapy (Fig. 6) (133). If hormone stimulation is not contraindicated and chemotherapy
can wait, we will perform ovarian stimulation followed by
mature egg collection. If, however, hormone stimulation is
contraindicated or there is no time, then IVM with or
without ovarian tissue freezing are the options. I saw a stage
2 estrogen receptor breast cancer patient on a Wednesday
afternoon clinic who needed to start chemotherapy a week
later. We gave her hCG 10,000 IU that evening, retrieved
19 GV eggs on Friday, matured 17 of them by Sunday,
and vitriﬁed 17 MII oocytes Sunday evening (134). We
were able to preserve her fertility without any ovarian stimulation, surgery, or delay of chemotherapy. The use of IVM
also allows multiple egg collections to be performed at any
phase of the menstrual cycle including the luteal phase
(135).

POTENTIAL FUTURE APPLICATIONS
GV nuclear transfer to overcome
age-related infertility
GV nuclear transfer is a potential future use of IVM. Because
aneuploidy probably occurs with meiotic division of the
oocyte, it is plausible that if GV nuclear transfer is undertaken
with a woman in her late 40s to an enucleated oocyte from a
young egg donor, with electrofusion, followed by IVM and
preimplantation genetic screening, it may be possible to avoid
egg donation by making the older woman’s eggs better
quality.

Ethnic differences in IVM outcome
One unexpected ﬁnding in the last couple of years is that
we have observed much better results with IVM in some
ethnic groups than in others. I had always been surprised
by the initial results from some groups in California
showing that IVF results were lower in women of Chinese
origin compared with Caucasians. It led me to believe

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
209
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 6

Preservation strategies offered to female cancer patients.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

that perhaps because the protocols that we use are almost
all derived from research in Western Europe or North
America, we just assume that they are equally applicable
to all age groups and all ethnic origins. Just like we realize
today that patients with the same type and stage of cancer
may respond quite differently to different treatment protocols, it may well be that this applies equally to reproduction. Because of our long history of the use of IVM, we
had the pleasure of working, training, and collaborating
with IVM centers around the world. It often appears that
centers in Vietnam, China, Japan, and Korea are able to
get better results than many more established centers in
Western Europe and in North America. Therefore, I am
now planning to set up a chain of centers worldwide in
which the same protocols can be used for both IVF and
IVM, with people of different backgrounds with the same
standard operating procedures and culture media. Combined with genetic screening of embryos in appropriate
cases, all the data can be subjected to deep learning and algorithms for artiﬁcial intelligence to try to tease out the
role of ethnic origin in results of fertility treatment of
IVF and IVM. This perhaps could lead to paradigm changes
in the coming years.

IVM for social egg freezing
A major issue with reproduction nowadays is the low fertility
rate below replacement levels in developed countries, largely
as a result of delayed childbearing. If a man has cancer, there
is no debate that he should freeze sperm before chemotherapy.
Women do not need chemotherapy to lose their fertility.
Fertility invariably rapidly declines with advancing age. It

would therefore seem sensible that every woman should
consider freezing eggs when they are young to preserve
fertility. In practice, many women are unaware of this rapid
decline of fertility (136), which requires public education. At
other times, they feel it would not affect them but the fact
is that even happily married women with children face a
high risk of divorce and may need to start a second family
in their later years so that social egg freezing makes sense.
The ﬁnal impediments are cost and need for ovarian stimulation. The latter two concerns can be overcome by IVM social
egg freezing. Although current results are suboptimal (133),
research by Moawad et al. (137, 138) will hopefully improve
success rates in the future, so that every young woman can
easily undertake multiple IVM egg freezing cycles to create
a personal egg bank for herself.

CONCLUSIONS
Although IVM was ﬁrst introduced as a method to avoid
OHSS in women with PCO/PCOS, the use of IVM has
evolved but is nevertheless useful in women at very
high risk of OHSS, those who wish to avoid hormonal
stimulation completely, some women who repeatedly produce poor-quality embryos with regular IVF for no
obvious reason, and poor responders who do not wish to
undertake egg donation. IVM should be considered whenever natural cycle or modiﬁed cycle IVF is deemed indicated. IVM is useful for fertility preservation when there
is a contraindication to the use of hormonal stimulation
or when there is extreme urgency, and IVM may be
deemed an alternative to FSH IUI especially in young patients. Potential applications of IVM in the future include

210
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
GV nuclear transfer to overcome age-related infertility and
IVM for social egg freezing.

OOCYTE DONATION
Richard J. Paulson, M.D., M.S.
Oocyte donation was the natural consequence of the technique of IVF. Once it became commonplace to observe oocytes in a laboratory dish, it did not require a large leap of
the imagination to realize that human eggs could be donated,
in a manner analogous to that of sperm. In the early 1980s, at
a time when only a handful of successful pregnancies with
IVF had been achieved, several groups began experimenting
with egg donation. It was thought to be a logical method of
achieving pregnancy in women with premature ovarian failure as well as in those who wished to avoid passing on to their
children a heritable disease.
Since all oocyte retrievals at that time required laparoscopy, a relatively traumatic procedure, initial attempts at
oocyte donation involved eggs obtained at the time of IVF
performed on infertile women who were themselves undergoing fertility treatment. Since embryo cryopreservation was
also in its infancy, fertilized eggs obtained at the time of
IVF were either transferred to the uterus or discarded. Therefore, when a larger number of eggs was obtained, one or more
could reasonably be donated to a potential recipient without
compromising the success of the treatment of the potential
donor. It was this set of circumstances that led to the ﬁrst successful clinical pregnancy after egg donation (139). A woman
undergoing IVF in Australia had ﬁve oocytes retrieved and
elected to donate one of those oocytes to another infertile
woman, who was ovulating naturally at the same time. The
oocyte successfully fertilized, was transferred into the synchronously developing endometrium of the recipient, and
successfully implanted. Unfortunately, this pregnancy ended
in a miscarriage. Shortly after this proof of concept, the same
group of investigators reported a successful term pregnancy
after the transfer of an embryo derived from a donated egg.
In this case, the recipient had premature ovarian failure and
the endometrium had been prepared with exogenous estrogen
and P (140). This pregnancy, achieved in late 1983, proved to
be a landmark event. The success of this technique demonstrated several basic physiologic principles. First, there did
not appear be a prohibitive immune reaction on the part of
the recipient of the donated oocyte. Second, the recipient’s
uterus could be prepared for implantation with the use of
exogenous estrogen and P. The new procedure appeared to
be a viable option for women who needed a donated egg to
conceive. However, a major barrier to the widespread use of
egg donation by IVF at that time was the need for general
anesthesia and laparoscopy to obtain the eggs from the donors. This relatively invasive step discouraged the use of
designated egg donors, such as sisters wishing to donate
eggs to their infertile sisters. Less invasive options for obtaining eggs began to be explored.
The nonsurgical transfer of embryos had previously been
reported in several mammalian species, with the ﬁrst report
(in a rabbit model) appearing in 1890 (141). The method relied

on natural ovulation and fertilization in the donor. The developing embryo was then ﬂushed from the uterus of the donor
before implantation and then transferred to the uterus of the
recipient (142). In the early 1980s, a group of investigators led
by John Buster at Harbor-UCLA attempted to apply this technique to humans (143). The concept was not complicated,
even if the actual practice proved challenging: normally
ovulatory women under the age of 35 were selected to be
egg donors. At the time of spontaneous ovulation, they
were inseminated with the sperm of the husband of the infertile recipient. The uterus of the donor was then ﬂushed
sequentially on post-LH surge days 4, 5, and 6 in an effort
to recover the fertilized blastocyst. The recovered conceptus
was then transferred to the uterus of the infertile woman,
whose ovulation was monitored and thus known to be synchronous with the ovulation of the donor. Endometria of recipients with ovarian failure were prepared with exogenous
estrogen and P. Several pregnancies were achieved in this
manner, by both the group at Harbor-UCLA (144) and a group
in Italy (145).
The clinical efﬁciency of uterine ﬂushing as a treatment
of infertility remained low, since nonstimulated natural
ovulatory cycles were being used. The logical step of adding
controlled ovarian stimulation of the donors to the process
was subsequently investigated by two groups in the late
1980s. Unfortunately, ovarian stimulation did not produce
the hoped-for success; rather than increasing the yield of
recovered blastocysts, the number of recovered embryos
recovered actually decreased (146). Moreover, some donors
now experienced retained pregnancies, as the uterine ﬂushing
procedure appeared to become less efﬁcient as a result of the
stimulation (147). The reasons for this lack of success are still
not clear, because further attempts at uterine lavage were
abandoned as a new method of oocyte retrieval came into
use that relied on the rapidly advancing technology of transvaginal ultrasound.
Transvaginal ultrasound–guided follicle aspiration revolutionized oocyte donation. Egg retrievals could, in most instances, be accomplished in an ofﬁce setting under
conscious sedation. Egg donors no longer needed to undergo
insemination with sperm or risk a subsequent retained pregnancy. Controlled ovarian stimulation could be used, thus
increasing the yield and efﬁciency of the process. Whereas
previous egg donation attempts used ‘‘spare oocytes’’ donated
by infertile women, egg donation now resembled standard
IVF. This change in the process made meaningful comparisons between the two techniques possible. It became clear
that oocytes obtained from young, fertile donors resulted in
much better IVF outcomes than those obtained with oocytes
obtained from older, infertile patients (148). It also became
possible, for the ﬁrst time, to compare pregnancy outcomes
in younger versus older recipients. Since quality of oocytes
could now be controlled, the effect of the age of the uterus
on pregnancy success could be estimated. As is now well
known, no decrease in pregnancy rates was observed with
the increasing age of the recipient, even beyond the age of
40 years (149). The observation of this unanticipated physiologic principle opened the doors to oocyte donation to women
of advanced reproductive age and made pregnancy possible

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
211
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
for thousands of women who were previously thought to be
hopelessly infertile. Subsequent studies demonstrated that
pregnancies could be achieved even in women who were
beyond the age of natural menopause (150). Obstetrical risks
are higher for older women, but pregnancy rates with eggs
donated by young women remain high, regardless of the
age of the recipient.
Since recipients often had premature ovarian failure, and
thus were not normally cycling, endometrial receptivity had
to be induced with the use of exogenous hormones. A variety
of doses and routes of administration of estrogen as well as P
were tried. After some 30 years of experience, there is still not
one ‘‘ideal’’ regimen that works better than others (151). It
does appear that P has to be administered either by the IM
or the transvaginal route, as oral, rectal, and transdermal
routes are associated with excessive metabolism and inadequate bioavailability. Since estrogen is required in far lower
doses than those of P, virtually all routes have been reported
to be successful, including oral, transdermal, IM, and vaginal.
One of the unanticipated ﬁndings that resulted directly from
the exogenous administration of steroids via the vaginal route
was the discovery of the apparent selective uptake of steroids
from the upper vaginal canal directly into the endometrium. It
had been known for quite some time that steroids are absorbed readily through the vaginal epithelium, but when
endometrial biopsies were performed, endometrial tissue
levels of both estrogen and P were found to be far higher after
vaginal than after IM administration (152). Therefore, vaginal
administration of steroids for the purpose of endometrial
development is a highly efﬁcient process. The physiological
reasons for this ‘‘uterine ﬁrst-pass effect’’ are only speculative
at this time.
Since the timing of administration of both estrogen and P
could now be controlled, it also became possible to deﬁne a
timing window, during which embryo implantation would
best take place. The ‘‘window of implantation’’ was a novel
concept (142, 153) that has continued to be investigated to
the present day; a full understanding and description have
not yet been achieved. It does seem fairly clear that to
prepare the endometrium for implantation, adequate
estrogen pretreatment or ‘‘priming’’ must take place to
induce sufﬁcient P receptors in the endometrium. After this
pretreatment period, adequate P signaling is required to set
in motion the endometrial changes that eventually result in
endometrial receptivity during the implantation window.
Optimal timing of the initiation of P relative to the time of
egg retrieval continues to be debated, likely because the
window of implantation is fairly wide, and many other
confounding factors inﬂuence embryo implantation (151).
In the early 2000s, techniques of oocyte cryopreservation
advanced to the point where reliable results could be obtained
with elective oocyte cryopreservation and subsequent thawing (154). This was an important advance in assisted reproduction, primarily for women who wished to preserve their
fertility when faced with imminent ovarian failure, such as
occurs as a side effect of cancer therapy. Other women chose
to preserve their oocytes as a method of mitigating the agerelated decline in reproductive potential. In the context of
oocyte donation, oocyte cryopreservation made possible the

establishment of oocyte banks, which provided frozen donor
oocytes to recipients in a manner analogous to that of frozen
sperm in sperm banks. Oocyte banks brought with them a new
set of issues that are, as of this writing, still unresolved. Previously, there was little motivation to obtain more oocytes
from a single stimulation of a donor than was reasonably
needed to produce a pregnancy. However, with egg banks,
every oocyte obtained from a donor has very real commercial
value. Oocyte donors are producing ever more oocytes from
stimulations that are designed to maximize oocyte yield.
How this gradual change in donor stimulation is going to
translate into pregnancy outcomes and risks to the donors remains to be seen. However, at present, it does appear that success rates with frozen eggs are similar to those with fresh eggs.
In the future, it may be possible to generate human oocytes from stem cells. Both sperm and oocytes have been successfully generated from induced pluripotential stem cells in
the laboratory in nonhuman mammalian species, leading to
live births. It seems likely that this technique, best described
as ‘‘in vitro gametogenesis,’’ will be applicable to humans as
well (155). The biological details of such processes are still
incompletely understood, but it seems plausible that in
vitro–generated oocytes might well be able to circumvent
the age-related decline in reproductive potential, in addition
to providing gametes to those patients without gonads.
When this occurs, oocyte donation from one woman to
another will likely stop being used as a method of overcoming
infertility. In vitro–generated oocytes will allow women to
reproduce with their own genetics at a time when their own
in vivo–generated oocytes are no longer functional. Analogously, fertility preservation by cryopreservation of gametes
may be obviated by this technology. Since preimplantation
genetic testing allows those patients who carry heritable diseases to avoid passing these to the next generation, oocyte
donation is also unlikely to be needed for this indication in
the future.
At present, however, oocyte donation remains an important component of the treatment of infertility. It remains an
essential treatment for women whose ovarian function is
lost to premature ovarian failure, as a result of gonadotoxic
treatment for malignancies or simply as the result of reproductive aging. When, in the future, oocyte donation becomes
simply a part of the history of assisted reproduction, many of
its lessons will remain, including the induction of endometrial
receptivity, understanding of embryo-endometrial synchrony, and hormonal support of early pregnancy.

HISTORY OF THE USE OF
GESTATIONAL CARRIERS
IN THE UNITED STATES
James M. Goldfarb, M.D., M.B.A.
INITIAL GESTATIONAL CARRIER CASE
The ﬁrst birth using a gestational carrier occurred in April
1986 (156). The biological parents had a long history of

212
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
infertility. The wife had lost both of her fallopian tubes to
ectopic pregnancies. In 1981, the couple went to Bourn
Hall in England to attempt IVF. At that time, Bourn Hall
had the most experience in the world with IVF. The couple
did conceive with IVF at Bourn Hall. However, at 22 weeks
of gestation, the wife’s uterus ruptured. The uterine rupture
caused the baby to die and the wife to undergo a hysterectomy. The husband, a New Jersey cardiologist, realized that
his sperm and his wife’s eggs were obviously able to
conceive a pregnancy. In 1984, he and his wife inquired
of several fertility centers that had successful IVF programs
at that time whether it would be feasible to have embryos
conceived with their sperm and eggs implanted into
another woman’s uterus. My team at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Cleveland, Ohio, found the proposal to be
very interesting and challenging. We contacted the couple
and told them we were, from a scientiﬁc standpoint, very
interested in their proposal. However, we were concerned
about the ethical and legal issues. We did offer the couple
the opportunity to come to Mount Sinai to further evaluate
their proposal. The couple had consulted a lawyer and
brought a large amount of legal documentation to Mount
Sinai. The couple met with the Mount Sinai Ethics Committee and the Mount Sinai Institutional Research Board. After
long deliberations, the Ethics Committee and the Institutional Review Board both approved the proposal for this
one case.
The logistics of synchronizing the cycles of the biological mother and the gestational carrier were much more
complex at that time than they are now. GnRH agonists
were not being used nor was programmed endometrial stimulation with estrogen and progesterone. In addition, embryo
freezing was not at all efﬁcacious at the time. Thus, we had
to hope that the timing of the biological mother’s egg
retrieval would be somewhat synchronous with the spontaneous ovulation of the gestational carrier. The ﬁrst two attempted cycles had to be canceled because the cycles were
not synchronous. The gestational carrier became discouraged and was not willing to attempt a third cycle. A second
gestational carrier was chosen, and the ﬁrst cycle with this
carrier was sufﬁciently synchronized to proceed and was
successful. The baby was born in April 1986 and made history as not only the ﬁrst baby born by a gestational carrier
but also as the ﬁrst baby to be legally handed over to a nonbirth mother without having to be adopted. During the pregnancy, the biological parents had obtained a court order
declaring them the legal parents and stating that their names
should be on the birth certiﬁcate. The baby was featured on
the cover of Life magazine in April 1987, in honor of her
ﬁrst birthday. She graduated from Emory University in
2008 and currently lives in New York City where she got
married in 2016. Attending her wedding was one of the
highlights of my career.

INDICATIONS FOR USAGE OF
GESTATIONAL CARRIERS
The initial, and still classic, indication for use of a gestational
carrier is a woman with no uterus, either because she has had

a hysterectomy or because she was born without a uterus.
With time the indications for use of a gestational carrier
greatly expanded to include
1. Uterus that is compromised enough to clearly impair
implantation.
2. Medical disease that would be dangerously exacerbated by
a pregnancy.
3. Failed IVF. Initially this did not seem to be an indication
for the use of a gestational carrier, but with time it has
been shown to be efﬁcacious for selected women with failure of implantation.
4. Recurrent miscarriage especially if there is an uncorrectable uterine issue, but it may also be efﬁcacious in certain
cases of unexplained recurrent miscarriages.
5. Poor obstetric history including most commonly recurrent
premature deliveries.
6. Same-sex male couples/single men.

USE OF GESTATIONAL CARRIERS IN THE
UNITED STATES
The use of gestational carriers in the United States has greatly
increased through the years, numerically and also proportionally, compared with nongestational carrier cycles. According
to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in 1999
there were 727 gestational carrier cycles performed in the
United States, which accounted for 1% of IVF cycles in the
United States. In 2013, there were 3,432 gestational carrier
cycles, which accounted for 2.5% of IVF cycles performed
in the United States. Between 1999 and 2013, the number
of clinics performing gestational carrier cycles increased
from 167 (45%) to 324 (69%). Because many countries do
not allow the use of gestational carriers, patients outside of
the United States elect to come to the United States in order
to use a gestational carrier. The percent of gestational carrier
cycles used by non-U.S. residents has ﬂuctuated over the
years. From 1999 through 2005 the percentage of non-U.S.
residents using gestational carriers decreased from 9.5% to
3.0%. Then from 2005 to 2013 the percentage increased
from 3.0% to 18.5% (157).
Over the years the percentage of gestational carriers using
donor eggs has increased. Currently slightly more than half of
gestational carrier cycles use donor eggs. Although the relative contribution is not reported, clearly one of the reasons
for the increase in the use of egg donors in gestational carrier
cycles is the increased number of same-sex male couples and
single males desiring to have a family.
As embryo cryopreservation has become so much more
efﬁcacious, the majority of the gestational carrier cycles use
frozen embryos. This negates the need to coordinate the carrier and the biological mother’s cycles. The use of frozen embryos is also useful in cases in which there is concern about
obtaining transferable embryos from the biological parents.
In this case, one can determine whether there will be transferable embryos before the biological parents incur the expense
(especially legal expense) of ﬁnalizing a gestational carrier.
The use of gestational carriers is much more complex
than the use of egg donors. The American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) has established recommendations

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
213
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
for practices using gestational carriers (158). While one can
never completely eliminate contentious issues with gestational carriers, it seems that most of the publicized problems
in the United States are due to not conforming to the recommendations of the ASRM and/or delivering in states that are
not friendly to the use of gestational carriers. There are at least
three states (New York, New Jersey, and Michigan) that
declare paid gestational carrier contracts to be nonenforceable and/or illegal. Other states have many restrictions
including supporting gestational carrier procedures only if
the intended parents’ gametes are used. In contrast, states
such as California consistently uphold intended parents’
rights to parenthood regardless of whether they use their
own genetic material or donated gametes. An example of a
case that became extremely contentious involved a samesex male couple who used an anonymous egg donor and
the sister of one of the men as a gestational carrier. Toward
the end of the pregnancy the carrier stated she wanted custody of the twin boys. The ASRM guidelines recommend psychological counseling of the gestational carrier and
independent legal counsel for the carrier and the biological
parents and that the carrier has had at least one birth. In
this case, none of these recommendations were followed
and, in addition, the baby was delivered in New Jersey. Needless to say, this resulted in prolonged legal proceedings and in
somewhat of a joint custody arrangement.
Even more so than with many other reproductive technologies, the use of gestational carriers has raised multiple psychological and ethical issues. The details of these issues are
beyond the scope of this article but include reproductive autonomy, commodifying women, commodifying children,
coercion, exploitation, and impact on the family.

CHOOSING A GESTATIONAL CARRIER
Choosing a gestational carrier is much more difﬁcult than
choosing an egg donor, particularly an anonymous egg
donor, whom the infertile couple will never meet or have an
ongoing relationship with. About two-thirds of our couples/
individuals use an agency or social media to ﬁnd a gestational
carrier. The other third use a gestational carrier they know.
The known carriers are often relatives, but our patients have
used a variety of other sources, such as friends and neighbors.
One of our patients had two daughters carried by two different
gestational carriers. She was very open about her use of gestational carriers and mentioned her use to the checkout woman
at the grocery store. The woman said she would love to be a
gestational carrier. Shortly thereafter, my patient decided to
have another child and took the checkout woman up on her
offer. Another of my patients had previously donated eggs
to her sister and then later found that she would need to use
a gestational carrier. Her sister to whom she had donated
eggs became her gestational carrier.
As mentioned previously it is imperative to follow the
ASRM guidelines when gestational carriers are being used.
It is particularly important to make sure there is no coercion
when known carriers are being used. For example, a mother
could put pressure on a daughter to carry a pregnancy for
another daughter who needs a carrier. It is imperative to
meet with the proposed carrier alone and to make sure she

is not being coerced. I always tell the proposed carrier that
if she feels she is being coerced I will say there is a medical
reason she cannot be a carrier.

WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED
Clearly the management of the gestational carrier treatment
cycle has become much simpler over the years since the ﬁrst
successful cycle in 1985. The major reasons are the use of programmed endometrial stimulation for the carrier and the shift
to the use of frozen embryos in gestational carrier cycles. It
has also been clearly shown that nonmedical problems with
use of gestational carriers can be minimized by strict adherence to the ASRM guidelines.
The use of gestational carriers has also enhanced knowledge in other areas of reproductive endocrinology. At the
beginning of this decade it began to be questioned whether
for many (or possibly all) patients going through IVF it may
be preferable to freeze all embryos and transfer them in a later
programmed cycle. Results of gestational carrier cycles were
helpful in providing insight into this question. The 2010–
2011 Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology data
showed that up to age 40 years, the age-adjusted success rates
for gestational carrier cycles were 7%–8% higher than for
fresh non–gestational carrier cycles. In contrast, when success
rates were compared between gestational carriers and infertile
women using thawed embryos derived from egg donors, the
success rate of gestational carriers was only 1%–2% more
than that of infertile women (159). These data supported the
rather new postulation that the endometrium in programmed
frozen transfer cycles is preferable to that in a fresh IVF cycle.
Woo et al. reported on perinatal outcomes in the same
women after natural conception versus a subsequent gestational carrier cycle. They showed increased negative perinatal
outcomes in the offspring from the gestational carrier cycles.
They suggest assisted reproductive procedures may affect embryo quality, despite a healthy uterine environment (160). A
recent article by Murugappan et al. (161) found, as have
others, that the live birth rate across all IVF types was higher
for gestational carriers. They also found the use of a gestational carrier resulted in higher birth weights among autologous fresh transfers and donor fresh and cryopreserved
transfers. We recently compared outcomes of pregnancies
when embryos derived from donor eggs were transferred to
a gestational carrier or to an intended parent. As with autologous eggs, the use of donor eggs had a higher live birth rate
when transferred to a gestational carrier. In addition, the incidence of prematurity and low birth weights was signiﬁcantly
lower in gestational carriers (unpublished data).

THE FUTURE
It certainly seems the trend toward increased use of gestational
carriers will continue. The main limitation on the degree of
growth is the extremely high cost involved with the use of a
gestational carrier. The recent success of uterine transplantation offers an alternative to gestational carrier in the subset of
cases where the woman has no uterus or a nonfunctional
uterus (161). Currently, the medical complexity and the cost
of uterine transplantation will greatly limit its use. However,

214
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
as with other disrupting technologies, the process may, with
time, become more efﬁcacious and efﬁcient, thus providing
a more realistic alternative to a subset of women for whom
now the only alternative is a gestational carrier.

UTERUS TRANSPLANTATION

primates), both the DD and LD concepts were evaluated. The
LD concept was evaluated in animals both by autologous
UTx, with no need for IS, and by allogeneic UTx.
The deﬁnition of a successful UTx procedure is whether it
can render the recipient fertile to deliver a healthy offspring.
This issue has been evaluated in several animal species as
described below.

Mats Br€
annstr€
om M.D., Ph.D.

Fertility after UTx in rodents

Absolute uterine factor infertility (AUFI) was untreatable, until 2014, when proof of concept was established with the birth
of a healthy baby boy after uterus transplantation (UTx) (162,
163). Women with AUFI have either congenital/surgical
uterine nonappearance or any anomaly (functional/
anatomical) that hinders implantation or continued
pregnancy. The AUFI prevalence is around 20,000 women of
fertile age in a population of 100 million (164). Gestational
surrogacy is an alternative, but not a treatment, to achieve
genetic motherhood and legal motherhood (after adoption
from surrogate). The surrogacy procedure is nonapproved in
most countries due to ethical, religious, and/or legal reasons.
An uterine allograft is a type of vascularized composite
allograft transplantation, like the face and hand. However,
the extraordinariness of UTx, compared with transplantation
of the hand and face, is that live donors (LDs) can also be used.
Moreover, also unlike solid organ transplants, the blood ﬂow
of a uterine graft will be shared by two individuals (mother
and fetus), and the success of UTx is not demonstrated within
days but after more than a year after transplantation, with the
possible delivery of a healthy child. After the woman has
delivered the number of children she wishes, hysterectomy
should be conducted. Thus, immunosuppression (IS) is only
temporary, and this will considerably reduce the risk for ISassociated side effects, such as nephrotoxicity, diabetes, and
certain malignancies.
The Swedish team began research preparations in the UTx
area in 1999, initially with experiments in the mouse. This resulted in the ﬁrst live births, in any species, being reported in
the mouse in 2003 (165). Later our preparations for clinical
UTx involved four more animal species, including nonhuman
primates, and preclinical human studies. Our evolution of this
new procedure, from basic animal studies toward clinical
application, follows the IDEAL recommendations for the
introduction of surgical innovations (166).

The mouse UTx model was heterotopically transplanted with
the uterine graft and with blood ﬂow through end-to-side
caval-caval and aortic-aortic vascular anastomoses (165).
The original demonstration of embryo implantation in any
UTx setting was in the mouse after ET. Pregnancy rate per
uterus was equal in the transplanted uteri as compared with
the native control uteri with offspring of normal weight
(165). The growth trajectory up to adulthood followed the
typical curves, and normal fertility was observed. No studies
exist on fertility after allogeneic UTx in the mouse.
In the rat, with larger blood vessel size, the uterus was placed
orthotopically and with anastomoses performed end-to-side on
the common iliacs. In syngeneic UTx, between inbred Lewis rats,
the pregnancy rate was similar in UTx animals as in controls,
and there was no difference in the number of pups per pregnancy
(167). The growth trajectory was similar in offspring from animals of the UTx group and the sham-operated control group.
The ﬁrst ever report of fertility after allogeneic UTx was a study
exploring this in the rat with discordance between two major
histocompatibility sites and tacrolimus IS to prevent rejection
(168). Pregnancy rates were similar in the UTx group and in
the control group. A follow-up study, also with tacrolimus IS,
involved Lewis donors and Piebald-Virol-Glaxo recipients
(169). The pregnancy rate was somewhat lower in the UTx group,
as compared with the two sham-operated control groups. Birth
weights of UTx offspring and growth trajectories of the pups until postnatal week 16 were unaffected in comparison with controls (169). These data indicated for the ﬁrst time that
allogeneic UTx may be regarded as safe in terms of perinatal
outcome, at least in a rodent species.

ANIMAL RESEARCH
Several animal models have been used in preclinical UTx
research. UTx was then customized with respect to the size
of the vasculature and the opportunity to accomplish vascular
connections. In the rodent models, the deceased donor (DD)
concept was exclusively used since parts of the aorta or common iliac arteries were harvested alongside the uterine graft,
to gain large enough vessels to master vascular anastomoses.
Moreover, the availability of inbred mouse and rat strains
made it possible to perform syngeneic transplantation, with
no need for IS. This allowed us to study the effects of transplantation surgery in isolation, without the added effects of
IS. In the larger animal models (mostly sheep and nonhuman

Fertility after UTx in sheep
Fertility in the sheep was ﬁrst demonstrated after autologous
UTx with uterine-tubal-ovarian transplantation and end-toside vascular anastomoses of the uterine artery, uteroovarian vein, and ovarian artery, including an aortic patch,
to the external iliacs (170). After spontaneous mating,
offspring of normal sizes were delivered by cesarean section,
around 2 weeks before term (170).
The allogeneic sheep UTx model involved surgery with
hysterectomy including short vascular pedicles of the uterine
artery and vein with two identical operations done in parallel
to shift the uteri between outbred sheep (171). Anastomosis
was by bilateral end-to-end anastomosis of the uterine arteries and veins. ET was performed in ﬁve ewes, and three
became pregnant. One pregnancy resulted in a live birth via
cesarean section, and the other two in ectopic pregnancy
and miscarriage (171). The live birth is so far the only live
birth from a large animal undergoing allogeneic UTx.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
215
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
Fertility after UTx in nonhuman primate
The only offspring after UTx in a nonhuman primate species
was after autologous UTx in the cynomolgus macaque (172).
The uterus was retrieved with the uterine artery and the deep
uterine vein, which after back table ﬂushing were anastomosed bilaterally end-to-side to the external iliacs. The total
surgical duration was 13.5 hours. Pregnancy after mating
occurred after three menstrual bleedings. The pregnancy
was uneventful until day 143, when partial placental abruption occurred and a cesarean section was performed with delivery of a live offspring but with fetal respiratory distress.

THE STORY BEHIND THE SWEDISH UTX TRIAL
The concept of UTx was presented to me in 1998, when I did a
fellowship in gynecologic oncology in Adelaide, Australia. I
had moved back from Sweden to Australia, where I had, in
the early 1990s, done a 3-year period of postdoctoral research
in ovarian physiology and ovulation in the group of Rob Norman and Colin Matthews. After obstetrics and gynecology
resident training in Sweden, I was ready to move back
down under for some more years of training, but now on
the clinical side. My intention was to do a fellowship in reproductive medicine in Adelaide. However, an Australian citizen
already occupied that position and I was instead offered a
training position in gynecologic oncology. That subspecialty
had never been in my thoughts, since I had long research
experience in a ﬁeld strongly related to reproductive medicine. However, I came to like the extensive surgery of gynecological malignancies, and my comprehensive experience in
rodents was beneﬁcial to quickly incorporate the tricks of
the trade of oncology surgery into my surgical arsenal. I
worked intensively with my resident doctor Ash Hanafy,
and after some months we took care of large parts of the surgery, while the chief surgeon was busy with administrative
tasks. In October 1998, we had an unusual preoperative
consultation with a charismatic woman in her mid-20s. She
had cervical cancer stage 1b and was planned to undergo a
standard radical hysterectomy with lymph node dissection
the following week. We told her about the consequences of
infertility due to the planned hysterectomy but that her
ovaries would be preserved. With her solution-oriented
mind she quickly responded with a way to solve this. Her solution was to transplant the uterus from her mother to treat
her approaching surgery-induced AUFI. I was bewildered by
her suggestion of this concept that I had never heard about.
An important activity for young doctors in Australia on Fridays is the after-work pub to debrief the clinical ups and
downs during the week that had passed. The debrieﬁng at
the pub this afternoon was all about the suggestion of a restoration of fertility by UTx in a woman having undergone hysterectomy or being born without a uterus. The concept got
clearer with further discussions. My unique combination of
a solid background in infertility-related research and the
recently acquired skills in advanced pelvic surgery opened
my eyes to the achievability of UTx as an infertility treatment.
The morning after, a PubMed search made me aware that
research on this topic had actually been done, mainly in
dogs, in the 1960s and 1970s, but then the research was aimed

to develop treatment for tubal factor infertility, with a transplantation of the oviducts possibly simpliﬁed by inclusion of
the uterus in the graft as well. The experiments were at a time
before effective IS was introduced, and with the introduction
of IVF in 1978 the research activities in this ﬁeld ceased.
As stated in the section above, we initiated our animalbased research on my return to Sweden in 1999 and it took
15 years until clinical proof of concept. This is a similar time
span as for IVF development, from when Edwards started his
ﬁrst attempt to mature human oocytes to the birth of Louise
Brown. Concerning both IVF and UTx, the research-based
approach and the long duration for preparations before clinical introduction have probably been key factors to success.

THE FIRST EIGHT BABIES IN THE WORLD—
ALL FROM THE SWEDISH TRIAL
Nine LD UTx procedures were performed in Sweden in 2013,
with eight recipients having congenital uterine agenesis and
one having undergone radical hysterectomy due to cervical
cancer 7 years before the trial (173). Broad medical and psychological examinations were done on recipients and donors
before UTx, and partners of recipients underwent psychological screening as well. The donors were related (mostly
mothers) in all but one case, where a close family friend volunteered for donation. Five out of nine donors were postmenopausal at donation, with two of the donors being above 60
years of age. Importantly, all donors had previous uncomplicated pregnancies with live births. Uterus recovery, including
dissection of the uterus with bilaterally vascular pedicles
comprising segments of the internal iliac arteries and veins,
lasted for 10.5–13 hours. The perioperative and postoperative
outcomes of the donors were favorable, and the hospital stays
were <1 week. All donors were in good psychological and
medical health at follow-up 1 year after surgery (174).
After graft procurement in the donor and back table preparation, the chilled and ﬂushed uterus was positioned inside the
pelvis of the recipient after dissection of the external iliacs.
Anastomosis was by bilateral end-to-side anastomoses to the
external iliacs of the uterine pedicles that included uterine vessels and the anterior iliac arteries as well as patches/segments of
the internal iliac veins. Surgical duration was 4–5 hours, and the
hospital stay was 4–9 days. The IS treatment was conventional
induction IS with maintenance of tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil, the latter being discontinued after 8 months if no
or only one rejection episode had occurred during this period
but replaced with azathioprine in patients with multiple rejection episodes. The 6-month outcome was that seven of nine uteri
were still in place, with one removed because of thrombotic occlusion of the uterine vessels and the other due to persistent intrauterine infection with abscess formation (174).
Single ETs were performed from around 12 months after
UTx. The ﬁfth woman to undergo UTx in the Swedish trial
became pregnant at her ﬁrst ET with a cleavage-stage embryo,
and subsequently the ﬁrst live birth after UTx took place in
Sweden, on September 4, 2014 (163).
In this case, a rejection episode at gestational week 18 was
diagnosed, which was effectively reversed by an intermittent
increase in corticosteroids. The pregnancy was then

216
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
uneventful, and she worked full time until gestational week
31þ5 days when the woman was admitted to the hospital
due to preeclampsia. During the following morning, a cesarean section was performed, and a healthy boy (1,775 g;
–11%) was delivered. The second UTx baby (175) was delivered in November 2014 by cesarean section around gestational week 35. The baby was of normal (þ4%) weight. The
uniqueness of this case was that the recipient received the
uterus donation from her own mother, so the uterus bridged
three generations. These two children as well as the six children who were delivered in 2014–2017 are healthy. The
take-home baby rate among the seven UTx women who
have undergone ET attempts of this Swedish trial is now
86%, and the clinical pregnancy rate is 100%, with one recipient having had a miscarriage after clinical pregnancy.
The Swedish group is underway to complete a second UTx
study, including 10 LD UTx attempts and with the donor surgery being performed through robotic-assisted laparoscopy to
render the procedure more minimally invasive and to possibly
decrease the surgical duration.

THE NINTH UTX BABY—
THE FIRST IN THE UNITED STATES
The ninth UTx baby worldwide was delivered in Dallas,
in December 2017. The UTx procedure was an LD procedure from a fully altruistic donor and followed the
initial three surgically failed attempts in September
2016 (176).

THE TENTH UTX BABY—
THE FIRST FROM A DECEASED DONOR
The ﬁrst successful DD UTx attempt in the world was performed in Sao Paolo, Brazil, in September 2016 (177). The
procurement was from a young brain-dead donor, and this
procedure was purposely prolonged to avoid vascular leakage
at ﬂushing on the back table and after reinitiating blood ﬂow
in the recipient. The birth of a healthy baby was announced in
the media in mid-December 2017. This birth is a milestone in
UTx, since it is the ﬁrst proof of concept of DD UTx.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
UTx is the ﬁrst available treatment for AUFI. As a consequence of meticulous research and preparations, the initial
clinical introduction of UTx in 2013 resulted in several
births that occurred during 2014–2017. UTx should stay at
an experimental stage for several years; this will allow
time to optimize the procedure further and to ensure that
the procedure is safe with respect to long-term medical
and psychological effects, which in the setting of LD UTx
include the effects on the donor, recipient, partner of recipient, and future children.
UTx may in the future also come to include nontraditional patient groups such as male-to-female transsexuals
and women with androgen insensitivity syndrome. These
two groups would also need oocyte donation to accomplish
pregnancy after combined IVF and UTx procedure.

Acknowledgments: Supported by the Jane and Dan Olsson
Foundation for Science and the Swedish Research Council.

FERTILITY PRESERVATION IN
WOMEN FOR MEDICAL REASONS
Jacques Donnez, M.D., Ph.D.,
Sherman Silber, M.D., and
Marie-Madeleine Dolmans, M.D., Ph.D.
Enthusiasm for fertility preservation in single women with
cancer began with the classic report by Gosden et al. in
1994 of successful pregnancies in sheep from transplantation
of cryopreserved ovary tissue slices. In Europe, the program of
ovarian tissue freezing in the ﬁeld of fertility preservation
started in 1996, following a symposium organized in Brussels
by Johan Smitz, Bob Edwards, David Baird, and Jacques
Donnez.
In 2004, Donnez et al. reported the ﬁrst successful frozen
ovarian tissue transplantation, followed later by Meirow et al.
in Israel. In the United States, Silber reported in 2005 the ﬁrst
successful fresh ovarian tissue transplantation between
monozygotic twins, and 2 years later the ﬁrst successful
frozen ovarian transplants.
Around the same time of these ﬁrst successes with
frozen ovarian tissue, oocyte freezing with vitriﬁcation
was introduced from Japan and Spain. In the majority of
centers, patients have access to oocyte vitriﬁcation or
ovarian tissue freezing. The indications of course depend
on the disease, the age, the timing, and the expertise of
the center.
Oocyte cryopreservation by means of vitriﬁcation has
become the standard method to preserve fertility in
women with benign diseases, those seeking fertility preservation for personal reasons, and women with cancer if
treatment can be safely postponed (178). Ovarian tissue
cryopreservation is speciﬁcally indicated for adolescents
and women who require immediate cancer treatment
(178, 179). The present review focuses on the indications
for these two techniques of fertility preservation and the
results obtained.
Fresh tissue transplantation in women with premature
ovarian insufﬁciency (POI) will also be addressed in this paper, allowing us to deﬁne characteristic differences between
fresh and frozen-thawed ovarian tissue reimplantation.

INDICATIONS FOR FERTILITY PRESERVATION
(SUPPLEMENTAL TABLE 1)
Malignant diseases
Fertility preservation remains a challenge, particularly in case
of breast cancer and hematologic malignancies (Hodgkin
lymphoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and leukemia), which
constitute the most frequent indications for fertility preservation (178). Chemotherapy (especially with cytotoxic alkylating agents), radiotherapy, surgery, or a combination of
these treatments can induce POI (178–181) because the

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
217
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
ovaries are very sensitive not only to cytotoxic drugs, but also
to radiation exposure of 5–10 Gy in the pelvic area.
The likelihood that POI will develop after therapy is
related to the ovarian reserve, which can vary enormously
from one woman to the next (180, 181). Therefore, giving a
patient or his/her parents an accurate assessment on the
risk of infertility is difﬁcult, because how a disease will
develop cannot be predicted (179).

Benign conditions
Certain benign conditions carry the risk of POI, so fertility
preservation should be offered in these instances as well.
Indeed, many autoimmune and hematologic disorders
require chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or both, and sometimes even bone marrow transplantation. Other conditions
that can impair future fertility include bilateral ovarian tumors, severe or recurrent ovarian endometriosis, and recurrent ovarian torsion. Ovarian endometriomas typically
result in a reduced ovarian reserve (182). Local intraovarian
inﬂammation induced by the presence of endometriomas
triggers follicle ‘‘burnout’’ characterized by activated follicle
recruitment with subsequent atresia. There is also
increasing evidence that surgery may cause considerable
damage to the ovarian reserve. In case of recurrence after
surgery, fertility preservation is strongly recommended
(178). A family history of POI and Turner syndrome are
further indications.

Age-related fertility decline
The largest group of women seeking fertility preservation
includes those who wish to postpone childbearing for
various personal reasons and the biggest threat to their
fertility is age. This point will be discussed elsewhere in
this supplement.

OOCYTE CRYOPRESERVATION (FIG. 7)
Data from a very recent review (183) suggest that oocyte
vitriﬁcation-warming is superior to slow-freezing–thawing
in terms of clinical outcomes.
In case of fertility preservation for benign indications or
social reasons, oocyte cryopreservation is clearly the highestyield strategy (183, 184). Moreover, it gives women the
possibility of reproductive autonomy. Cobo et al. (184)
recently reported the outcomes of 137 women returning to
use their oocytes that had been previously vitriﬁed for
nononcologic reasons. In their series, the authors observed a
huge difference in cumulative live birth rates (CLBRs) when
only ﬁve oocytes were used (15.4%), compared with eight
(40.8%) or ten (60.5%) (Supplemental Fig. 1) if subjects were
%35 years of age. In women aged >35 years, the respective
CLBRs were 5.1%, 19.9%, and 29.7%. Therefore, women
should be encouraged to freeze their eggs at a younger age to
give themselves the best chance of having a biologic child.
We should point out, however, that the excellent results
achieved by acclaimed centers around the world cannot be
generalized and used by less experienced centers to counsel
candidates for oocyte cryopreservation (178).

When contemplating fertility preservation in women
affected by cancer, there are ﬁve important points to bear in
mind if oocyte vitriﬁcation to be carried out (178):
1) To allow time for oocyte vitriﬁcation, chemotherapy needs
to be delayed by at least 10–12 days.
2) The subject must be postpubertal.
3) Speciﬁc controlled ovarian stimulation protocols should
be applied according to the steroid sensitivity of the cancer
in question.
4) Information on oocyte quality in women with cancer is
lacking.
5) The excellent results obtained in egg donation programs
cannot be extrapolated to women treated for cancer.
Cobo et al. reported lower live birth rates after oocyte vitriﬁcation in the population of women with cancer (184).

OVARIAN TISSUE CRYOPRESERVATION (FIG. 7)
In prepubertal girls and women who cannot delay the start of
chemotherapy, cryopreservation of ovarian tissue (Fig. 7) is
the only option for fertility preservation (178). However, strict
selection criteria need to be applied. As comprehensively discussed in one of our recent papers (178), the most important
are age <35 years, a R50% risk of POI, and a realistic chance
of surviving for 5 years.

Effect of ovarian biopsies on hormone production
Obtaining multiple biopsy samples from one ovary has not
been shown to compromise future hormone production
(178), whereas removal of a single ovary may shorten the
time to menopause by 1–2 years.

Techniques of cryopreservation
Initiated by Gosden, the slow-freezing procedure has been
widely applied in a clinical context since 1996. Some authors favor vitriﬁcation (185), but a great majority of centers still prefer the slow-freezing technique because more
than 95% of live births have been achieved after reimplantation of slow-frozen–thawed ovarian fragments (178,
179). On the other hand, there is no evidence that
vitriﬁcation of ovarian tissue is superior to slow freezing,
because vitriﬁcation has resulted in only two live births
so far.

Reimplantation of ovarian tissue:
pregnancy and live birth rates
After reimplantation of ovarian tissue in the pelvic cavity
(Fig. 7), ovarian activity is restored in more than 95% of cases
(178). The mean duration of ovarian function after reimplantation is 4–5 years, but it can persist for up to 7 years, depending on
follicular density at the time of ovarian tissue cryopreservation.
The ﬁrst pregnancy issuing from this procedure was reported in
2004. Pregnancy and live birth rates have continued to climb
steadily, showing an exponential increase (Fig. 8). Indeed, taking into account the latest published series (186–189), the
number of live births as of June 2017 exceeded 130 (178).

218
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 7

1) If the patient is prepubertal or requires immediate chemotherapy: Ovarian tissue is removed in the form of multiple biopsies (or an entire organ)
and cut into cortical strips. The tissue is then cryopreserved by slow freezing on site (or transported to a processing site at a temperature of 4 C).
After thawing:
 If there is no risk of transmitting malignant cells, the ovarian tissue can be grafted to the ovarian medulla (in the presence of at least one ovary) or
reimplanted inside a specially created peritoneal window.
 If there is a risk of transmitting malignant cells, ovarian follicles can be isolated and grown in vitro to obtain mature eggs, which can then be
fertilized and transferred to the uterine cavity. Isolated follicles may be placed inside a scaffold (alginate or ﬁbrin), creating an ‘‘artiﬁcial ovary’’
that can be grafted to the ovarian medulla or peritoneal window.
2) If the patient is postpubertal and can delay chemotherapy by 2 weeks: Mature oocytes are removed after ovarian stimulation and vitriﬁed on
site. After thawing, they are inseminated and, in the form of embryos, transferred to the uterine cavity.
3) The combined technique also can be applied, involving ovarian tissue cryopreservation followed by controlled ovarian stimulation and vitriﬁcation
of oocytes. This combined technique theoretically yields a 50%–60% chance of obtaining a live birth. (From Donnez J, Dolmans M, N Engl J Med
2017;377:1657–65.)
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
219
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 8

Since the ﬁrst pregnancy reported in 2004, the number of live births
has reached more than 130, showing a logarithmic increase over the
past 2 years and highlighting the need to move from experimental
studies to open clinical application (from Donnez J, Dolmans M,
N Engl J Med 2017;377:1657–65).
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

Because the number of reimplantations performed worldwide
(the true denominator) is not known, data collection was
based on patients from ﬁve major centers (N ¼ 111), yielding
a pregnancy rate of 29% and a live birth rate of 23%. These
rates were subsequently conﬁrmed in a series of 74 women
(FertiPROTEKT network), with pregnancy and live birth rates
of 33% and 25%, respectively (190).

Personal series
In our series of 22 women undergoing ovarian tissue reimplantation, the live birth rate was 41% (9/22), with a total
of 15 live births (178). One woman in our series delivered three
times, making her one of two patients worldwide to experience three pregnancies and births resulting from a single
ovarian tissue reimplantation procedure.
To improve outcomes, we must address issues such as follicle loss after reimplantation due to ischemia and follicular
activation (burnout). One approach involves enhancement
of graft revascularization by delivering both angiogenic and
antiapoptotic factors (178); another seeks to boost neovascularization using of adipose tissue–derived stem cells, as
recently demonstrated in an experimental model by our
group.
Transplanting ovarian tissue to heterotopic sites remains
somewhat questionable, however, if fertility restoration is the
goal.

Combined technique: ovarian tissue
cryopreservation followed by immediate oocyte
vitriﬁcation (Fig. 7)
It was recently demonstrated that ovarian tissue cryopreservation, followed immediately by ovarian stimulation and
oocyte retrieval (with a view to vitrifying mature oocytes),

does not impair oocyte number or quality (183). By combining
vitriﬁcation of oocytes and cryopreservation of ovarian tissue
in patients with cancer, a live birth rate of 50%–60% might
conceivably be obtained (Fig. 7). The combined technique
thus increases the efﬁcacy of the procedure and gives young
cancer patients a greater chance of success.
Vitriﬁcation of oocytes for age-related fertility decline
yields a CLBR of 60.5% among healthy women <36 years
of age (184). In women with cancer, the ﬁgure drops to 34%
(191), probably because of inferior oocyte quality in women
affected by the disease (178).
We therefore suggest that this combined technique be
offered to postpubertal patients at high risk of POI, as long
as chemotherapy can be delayed without jeopardizing cancer
treatment, to maximize their chances of achieving pregnancy
(178).

FRESH OVARIAN TISSUE TRANSPLANTATION
There are actually very few indications for fresh ovarian tissue transplantation. One previous indication is monozygotic
twins discordant for ovarian failure (192), and another is allografting from a related or unrelated donor who had previously been a bone marrow donor to the patient (193). A
third indication involves women in POI whose religion does
not allow egg donation but would tolerate an ovary allotransplant. The latter would require immunosuppression similar to
that of any other solid organ transplant.

Between monozygotic twins
The ﬁrst successful fresh ovarian tissue transplant in humans
occurred in 2005 between identical twins, one of whom had
POI and the other healthy and fertile. Grafting of ovarian cortex was the technique used (192).
There are a variety of techniques that have been used
for transplantation of ovarian tissue, but successful approaches all adhere to the same basic surgical principles
(Supplemental Fig. 2). Recipients of fresh ovarian cortical tissue have ‘‘dead’’ ovarian cortex resected to expose medullary
tissue, and hemostasis is obtained microsurgically with the
use of microbipolar forceps. The ovarian cortical graft is
attached with the use of interrupted 9-0 nylon sutures under
optical magniﬁcation. The medullary bed is also sutured to
the undersurface of the cortical graft to maintain close tissue
approximation. This approach avoids microhematoma formation between the transplanted cortex and underlying medulla
which, just as with skin grafts, would cause the overlying
grafted tissue to die. Donnez and Dolmans use a laparoscopic
approach, but the basic microsurgical principles remain the
same (182).
All of Silber’s series cases were successful (N ¼ 9), in that
all of them restored normal hormone function (Supplemental
Fig. 3). Among those nine patients, seven conceived, leading
to 14 pregnancies and 11 healthy births. These patients all
favored spontaneous pregnancy over in vitro fertilization
and egg donation, and wished to accomplish this in a onetime procedure without ovarian hyperstimulation. Studies
do not show unilateral oophorectomy to be detrimental to
fertility or with any impact on age of menopause, and Silber

220
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
felt comfortable allowing the donation of an ovary from sister
to sister.
The recipients continued to cycle from 2 to more than 8
years. Even those few with a low ovarian reserve conceived
from the fresh transplant within 2 years, and then again after
transplantation of residual frozen tissue. Normal menstrual
cycles resumed within 4–5 months, and day 3 FSH levels returned to normal by 4.5 months in all cases. As already noted,
in Silber’s series a total of 11 healthy babies were born after
the nine fresh tissue transplantations.
In the series by Donnez et al. (193), two other live birth
were documented after allografting of ovarian cortex between monozygotic twins with Turner syndrome (45,XO)
and discordant ovarian function.

Allografting between two genetically different
sisters (Supplemental Fig. 4)
The ﬁrst allograft of ovarian cortex between two genetically
different sisters was described in 2007 (194), and the ﬁrst series was published in 2010 by Donnez et al. (195) Three
women, aged 20, 15, and 12 years, underwent chemotherapy
and total irradiation before bone marrow transplantation
(BMT), the donor in each case being their HLA-compatible sis-

ters. Years later, HLA group analysis revealed complete
chimerism, and ovarian allografting was performed, with
the ovarian tissue donor being the sister who had already
donated bone marrow. The technique can be seen in
Supplemental Figure 4 and was described by Donnez et al.
(195). No immunosuppressive therapy was administered. No
signs of rejection was observed. Restoration of ovarian function occurred in all three cases (195).
The ﬁrst live birth to occur after ovarian tissue transplantation between two genetically different sisters was reported
in 2011. Because this is an acceptable practice in monozygotic
twins, there is no apparent reason not to apply it in genetically
different sisters. This is especially true if one of the sisters previously received bone marrow from the other, leading to complete chimerism (HLA compatibility) and obviating the need
for immunosuppressive treatment. This approach allows for
natural conception, which could be important on moral,
ethical, or religious grounds.
Acknowledgments: The authors thank Mira Hryniuk, B.A.,
for reviewing the English language of the manuscript and
Deborah Godefroidt and Sierra Goldsmith for their administrative help.

GENETICS
REPRODUCTIVE GENETICS
PARALLELING ASSISTED
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY
Joe Leigh Simpson, M.D.
Human in vitro fertilization (IVF) trailed human genetics in its
‘‘coming out’’ by only a few years in the 1960s and 1970s.
Both ﬁelds shared at the time a common fundamental lack
of scientiﬁc knowledge and withering criticism concerning
untoward consequences of their ‘‘premature’’ clinical
application.
For genetics, the prevailing opinion in the 1950s was that
genes played pivotal roles in relatively few medical disorders.
A few inborn errors of metabolism were known, as were
several famous monogenic disorders (e.g., hemophilia A,
sickle cell anemia). But there was little appreciation for the
etiologic breadth that single-gene disorders would eventually
play in diagnosis and clinical care. Sometimes it was even
stated that humans were too complex for a single gene to alter
the human phenotype with any frequency. Genetic textbooks
often resorted to botanical examples. A taint of eugenics
overlay the ﬁeld of human genetics. This author distinctly recalls his ﬁrst meeting at the American Society of Human Genetics (1967) when still a medical student. He was advised by a
well¼meaning and well¼known geneticist that physicians
should avoid human genetics because charges of eugenics
could never be erased. The game changer was prenatal genetic
diagnosis which began in the late 1960s just after it was

shown possible to culture amniotic ﬂuid cells (1966). Yet
even into the 1970s, clinical application was neither widely
used nor universally considered to be salutary.
Pioneers in IVF recall similar experience, as recounted
elsewhere in this volume. Like genetics, IVF and its biologic
requisites was similarly plagued by insufﬁcient knowledge.
Our pioneers were confronted with opprobrium for their attempted ‘‘unethical’’ clinical application.
In 2018, we celebrate parallel success of both IVF and
reproductive genetics. We owe this to visionary leaders in
both ﬁelds who stepped forward not only to advance the science, but also to construct the requisite infrastructure for
collaboration and ethical oversight. In this communication
we recapitulate how progress in reproductive genetics paralleled that of assisted reproductive technology (ART), sometimes in advance and sometimes following.

REPRODUCTIVE GENES AND DISORDERS OF
SEX DIFFERENTIATION
Not until 1956 did we learn that humans had 46 chromosomes. Before this, the diploid number was thought to be
48, determined on the basis of cross-sectional analysis of
testicular tissue. Tissue culture was only in its infancy when
Tjio and Levan (196) generated a karyotype from lymphocytes, providing the correct answer. A lesson to be repeated
is that new technology proves to be the ‘‘game changer.’’
This sequence would recur over the next decades for both
reproductive genetics and IVF (soon to take on the moniker
of ‘‘ART’’).

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
221
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
Soon after Tjio and Levan’s discovery, autosomal trisomies (of 13, 18, and 21) and sex chromosomal abnormalities were recognized. Gynecologists learned that Turner
syndrome was due to monosomy X. By extension, many
reasoned that so was all ovarian failure. It was assumed
that ovarian failure equated to presence of monosomy X cells
(somewhere), even if lymphocytes were nonmosaic 46,XX.
Mutant genes were not considered to be signiﬁcant causes
of ovarian pathology until much later. Now we realize that
monogenic causes are far more common in adults with premature ovarian failure than 45,X/46,XX mosaicism. The
concept of genetic heterogeneity is now well accepted.
In premature ovarian failure (POF)/premature ovarian
insufﬁciency (POI) the sentinel molecular example occurred
in 1994, when Aittomaki and de la Chapelle (197, 198) in
Finland applied nascent molecular sequencing to conﬁrm
autosomal recessive etiology for XX gonadal dysgenesis.
The explanation was a nucleotide missense mutation in
exon 7 of the FSHR gene, resulting in valine to alanine
(Val566Ala). Many other genes were later shown to be
pivotal for human oogenesis, initially leveraging knowledge
from murine knock-out models. Exploiting the homologous
human genes, investigators identiﬁed single-gene perturbations responsible for POI (see Qin et al. for updated tabulations
[199, 200]). Approximately 25% of POF/POI cases result from
a single-gene mutation. Increasingly, POF/POI genes are being shown to involve mechanisms less familiar to reproductive endocrinologists, such as chromosomal breakage or
DNA repair.
Similar single-gene advances relevant to ART are lagging. But one can expect genetic heterogeneity. One likely
example would be variable response to ovulationstimulating agents. When inevitably shown, this could be exploited to minimize ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Heterogeneity could similarly be predicted for endometrial
receptivity. Altered endometrial gene expression has already
been observed, and clinically applicable predictive genes are
expected. Another recent example are perturbations that exist
in zona pellucida genes (201).

MISCARRIAGES AND CHROMOSOMAL
ABNORMALITIES
Miscarriage is common and of importance both in reproductive genetics and in ART. Increasing scientiﬁc explanations
for miscarriage have resulted in a trajectory similar to monogenic etiology for POF. Initially, chromosomal abnormalities
were not envisioned as a common cause for miscarriage. Teratogens were thought to be more likely, or trauma. However,
cytogenetic studies in the 1960s soon revealed that at least
one-half of all ﬁrst-trimester miscarriages were due to aneuploidy or polyploidy. Chromosomes involved included not
just those causing standard autosomal trisomies (i.e., 13, 18,
and 21), but every chromosome. The most common was trisomy 16, responsible for 25% of aneuploid miscarriages or
10%–12% of all miscarriages. Triploidy and tetraploidy
were also frequent. When ART later became feasible, the inverse relationship between ART success and miscarriage
became obvious. Explanations for low ART success in women

of age R35 years became clear. Reproductive genetics and
ART both beneﬁted from early application of cytogenetic
technology.
Technologic advances in cytogenetics have since led us
further. Preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy
(PGT-A) is now widely applied to increase the likelihood
that an embryo transfer will be successful. One could logically
transfer only euploid embryo(s), eschewing transfer of
morphologically normal yet actually genetically abnormal
aneuploid embryos. The technology could not rely on the karyotype of a single cell, but it was initially possible with ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with chromosome-speciﬁc
probes. Initially, only ﬁve to nine chromosomes could be
interrogated, but by 2010 new genomic technologies (array
CGH or now next-generation sequencing) allowed all 24
chromosomes to be assessed. Given this, trophectoderm biopsy and PGT-A have been shown to beneﬁt women of age
35–40 years (202, 203). With the use of PGT-A, pregnancy
rates are increased by 20%. Miscarriage rates decrease, being
equal in 35–40-year-old women to those of younger women
(204). The well-known decrease in ART success is delayed if
only euploid embryos are transferred.

GENETICS OF GYNECOLOGIC DISORDERS:
PEDIGREES AND THE PATH TO SEQUENCING
The ability of reproductive genetics to reveal the breadth of
genes inﬂuencing gynecologic disorders was inchoate for a
considerable length of time. A genetic basis of skeletal and
connective tissue disorders (e.g., achondroplasia, Marfan syndrome) had been recognized much earlier. Rarity of reproductive geneticists was one explanation for limited progress.
Another was the unavoidably reduced number of familial aggregates, given that only women could be affected. Yet, even
in the 1960s attention was called to familial aggregates of
endometriosis, m€
ullerian aplasia (MA), incomplete m€
ullerian
fusion, and polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) (205). Reports were sparse, data were not population based, and causative genes could barely be hypothesized. By the 1980s useful
information was being generated. For example, recurrence
risks for ﬁrst-degree relatives in endometriosis proved to be
5%–7%, indicating polygenic etiology (206).
Traversing the gap to the present required the next quantum of technologic progress, namely facile DNA gene
sequencing. When the human genome was sequenced, the
‘‘normal’’ DNA sequence allowed one to interrogate regions
of individual genes. Gene associations according to agnostic
whole genome approaches identiﬁed unexpected genes associated with PCOS or POF/POI, after which perturbed sequences could be found (207, 208). Genes responsible for
endometriosis and uterine anomalies were identiﬁed.
Studying outcome of surrogate pregnancies with the use of
oocytes of women with MA revealed no uterine anomalies
in 18 female offspring. Autosomal dominant etiology,
therefore, was not a common explanation (209).
In ART, determining single genes of relevance is in its infancy. Few monogenic phenomena are known, but we should
anticipate that we can expect to ﬁnd these in lethal euploid
embryos, oocyte receptivity, and endometrial receptivity.

222
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

SEQUENCING THE EMBRYO BEFORE TRANSFER
If over the past 40 years there has been a ﬁeld whose velocity of progress is greater than IVF, it must be DNA
sequencing. Initially a nucleotide sequence could be
deduced only laboriously and retrospectively on the basis
of amino acid sequence. Sickle cell anemia was known to
be the result of glutamic acid replacing valine in codon 6.
The DNA sequence could thus be deduced: adenine in lieu
of thymine. Direct nucleotide sequencing for prenatal genetic diagnosis had to await technological advances. Development of polymerase chain reaction technology allowed
one to amplify DNA in sufﬁcient quantity to perform
sequencing. Restriction-fragment-length polymorphisms
could be exploited to cut DNA differentially. One could
now distinguish normal from mutant DNA sequences on
the basis of fetal DNA fragment lengths and thus distinguish normal from affected. Prenatal diagnosis for b-thalassemia by means of amniocentesis became possible. But
sequencing the entire human genome was awaited, often
with societal trepidation.
Sequencing the human genome had been a dream of geneticists forever, but for eons the dream was considered to be
quixotic, even wasteful. It was initially difﬁcult to imagine
how to proceed. One needed to accumulate innumerable small
DNA sequences and place them in proper order. A laborious
strategy was devised based on identifying fragments in which
nucleotides at the end of one fragment corresponded in
sequence to those at the proximal end of a second sequence.
The two fragments were therefore overlapping and must be
sequential (consecutive). This approach led to the sequenced
human genome in 2000 and again more completely in 2006
(210, 211).
Sequencing the human genome generated shock and
embarrassment to some. We humans did not have the expected hundreds of thousands of protein-coding genes, but
only some 21,000. Actually this made it easier to construct
a useful reference source from which to search for perturbations in genes (whole exome sequencing [WES]). Existence
of a reference source also made it possible to match an unknown DNA sequence with its chromosomal origin. More
efﬁcient methods were naturally developed, namely, amplifying and sequencing many DNA fragments concurrently.
Chromosome location of a tested sequence could quickly be
determined with the use of the encyclopedic ‘‘normal DNA’’
(computer) reference book. That a sample was different
from expectations could be determined. One could also use
whole-genome sequencing (WGS) for the 98.5% noncoding
regions. At present, presence of rare disorders can be detected
by sequencing an affected cohort in the nursery. Yield varies
but may be sufﬁciently high (10%–15%) to be applied to
routine clinical use. Sequencing is a ﬁrst-call approach in
many clinical circumstances, replacing the current odyssey
of laboratory and imaging tests and reducing hospitalization
length.
Soon all of us will be sequenced! Ergo, so should embryos
before transfer for ART. In miscarriages, 50% are chromosomally abnormal, but what explains the loss of euploid
embryos? Actually, only one-fourth of these are morpholog-

ically normal (212). The other three-fourths of euploid
embryos (3/8 of all miscarriages) are either growth-retarded
or morphologically abnormal according to embroscopy
(211). Etiology plausibly involves single-gene or polygenic
perturbation, given that these genetic etiologies account for
80% of the 2%–3% of infants with congenital anomalies. A
further reason is that only one-third of protein-coding genes
have a known function; many of the unknown two-thirds
may be pivotal for embryonic differentiation. Application of
WES and WGS for embryo evaluation seems obvious.
What will, then, be the ﬁnal outcome of genetic testing
for ART? I predict that genetic testing—WES, WGS, targeted
panels—will become as routine as PGT-A appears to be approaching. PGT-A plus sequencing already signiﬁcantly increases the number of embryos that should not be
transferred. ART transfer after targeted testing or WES will
result in 80% success.

PREIMPLANTATION GENETIC
DIAGNOSIS OF MONOGENIC
DISEASE AND HUMAN LEUKOCYTE
ANTIGEN MATCHING
Alan H. Handyside, Ph.D.
As we celebrate the past 40 years of IVF since the birth of
Louise Brown in 1978, it is remarkable to reﬂect that already
by the mid-1980s, fewer than 10 years later, genetic testing of
human preimplantation embryos for inherited diseases was
being proposed (213). The need to offer at-risk couples an
alternative to invasive prenatal testing, often resulting in
repeated terminations of affected pregnancies, and allow
them to start a pregnancy ‘‘knowing it was unaffected’’ had
been identiﬁed. IVF pregnancy rates had improved. The ﬁrst
papers on the use of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to
amplify short fragments of DNA from relatively small
numbers of cells had been published. For the ﬁrst time, it
was possible to contemplate identifying mutations at preimplantation stages when successive cleavage divisions of the
one-celled zygote, fertilized and cultured in vitro, reaches a
maximum of a few hundred cells. Then in 1989, building on
decades of work which had established the mutations in
only a handful of single-gene defects, for example, various
hemoglobinopathies, the ﬁrst of a series of ground-breaking
studies in various prevalent inherited diseases identiﬁed the
common DF508 mutation causing cystic ﬁbrosis by means
of rapidly improving sequencing methods (214). The stage
was set for the development of biopsy methods to safely remove cells from embryos after IVF and harness the power
of PCR to diagnose affected embryos before selecting unaffected embryos for transfer, a process that became known
as preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) (Fig. 9).

PRE- OR POSTCONCEPTION EMBRYO BIOPSY?
Verlinsky and Pergament, collaborating at the time primarily
on the establishment of chorion villus biopsy for prenatal
diagnosis, were the ﬁrst to propose PGD by ‘‘embryonic’’

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
223
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 9

A brief timeline of preimplantation genetic testing. Some of the main developments in 1) single cell genetics and genomics, 2) preimplantation
genetic diagnosis (now preimplantation genetic testing for monogenic disease [PGT-M]), 3) preimplantation genetic screening (now
preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy [PGT-A]), and 4) commercially available single cell diagnostics (panels from top to bottom) are
listed from the middle 1980s onward (see text for some of the key references). There were three major milestones in human molecular genetics
over this period: the development of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for amplifying short fragments of DNA in the middle 1980s; the
sequencing of a ﬁrst draft of the human genome in the early 2000s, and the ﬁrst $1,000 whole-genome sequencing in 2014.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

biopsy in 1984 and published an abstract the following year
in which they described bisecting three pronucleate triploid
embryos at the 4-cell stage and measuring enzyme activity
with the use of one-half of the embryo as a model for diagnosing inborn errors of metabolism. Verlinsky and others
were later to become the pioneers of polar body biopsy,
initially removing only the ﬁrst polar body for genetic testing,
to diagnose if the corresponding fertilized oocyte had inherited the normal or mutated maternal gene copy (allele),
though no pregnancy was established after their ﬁrst clinical
attempt (215). An advantage of this preconception approach
was that it avoided manipulation of fertilized embryos, which
some considered to be unethical and avoided possible damage
to the embryo itself. However, the limitations, including
recombination in the ﬁrst meiotic division, which prevents
diagnosis in a signiﬁcant proportion of oocytes, were quickly

recognized. They subsequently developed a strategy of biopsying both ﬁrst and second polar bodies and if necessary
following up with a cleavage-stage blastomere biopsy to
avoid the limitations and include detection of the paternal
allele. This approach was clinically more successful and
over the following decade, Verlinsky et al. published many
protocols for a range of single-gene defects.
Based on preliminary work in a mouse model of the Xlinked disease Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, our approach was to
focus on cleavage-stage biopsy at the 6- to 10-cell stage early
on the third day after conception. In the late 1980s, IVF culture media were based on those optimized for mammalian cell
lines and supplemented with heat-inactivated maternal
serum. This supported development to the blastocyst stage.
However, pregnancy rates after transfer of blastocysts were
very low. So despite the potential advantage of removing

224
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
several cells from the outer trophectoderm layer of the blastocyst for genetic testing, cleavage-stage biopsy was the only
practical option for clinical application. To minimize damage
to the embryo only a single cell, or exceptionally two cells,
were removed for genetic testing. The challenge therefore
was to detect the mutation status of the embryo from the single biopsied cell and to do this in only a few hours so that one
or more unaffected embryos could be selected for transfer
later the same day.
Cleavage-stage biopsy became the predominant method
for PGD and continued to be so until clinics increasingly
began to switch to blastocyst biopsy over the past 5–10 years.
Now blastocyst culture is routine and pregnancy rates per
transfer are higher than with cleavage-stage embryos. The
original method for biopsying herniating trophectoderm cells
was simply to excise them with a needle rubbed against the
holding pipette, which damaged cells in the process. The
development of noncontact infrared lasers for both zona drilling and biopsy was a major step forward (216); collateral
damage is minimized and blastocysts generally re-expand
quickly. The ability to cryopreserve embryos at the blastocyst
stage with very high survival rates by means of rapid cooling
or vitriﬁcation, and even revitrify biopsied blastocysts if
necessary, has also removed the need for rapid analysis before
transfer. This then allows biopsy samples to be transported to
genetic testing labs with no constraints on the time required
for analysis.

AMPLIFY ONCE, AMPLIFY TWICE
PCR is a powerful method for amplifying speciﬁc short fragments of DNA deﬁned by pairs of oligonucleotide primers,
with the use of a heat stable DNA polymerase and cycling
the temperature of the reaction between denaturation, annealing, and extension temperatures. The ampliﬁcation is
exponential and typically can generate 106 copies of the original template. However, because single cells have only 5–6
pg of DNA, amplifying the DNA fragment sufﬁciently to
detect on electrophoresis gels, for example, is still a challenge
regardless of the number of thermocycles.
One answer is to amplify a target sequence in a highly repetitive region of the genome. This enabled a DNA repeat speciﬁc to the Y chromosome and present in thousands of copies,
to be ampliﬁed from single cells. This allows the sex of the
embryo to be identiﬁed by the presence or absence of the
ampliﬁed product detected on acrylamide gels, with ampliﬁcation and electrophoresis taking only 4–6 hours, allowing
transfer of unaffected embryos later on the same day as the
biopsy. In X-linked recessive diseases (caused by gene defects
on the female X chromosome), for example, Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, male carriers are affected because the
Y chromosome does not have a copy of the gene, whereas female carriers are unaffected but are at risk of having affected
male children. Although second best to diagnosing the gene
defect itself, which allows affected carrier and unaffected
males to be distinguished, therefore, we were able to offer
couples at risk of various X-linked diseases PGD by
cleavage-stage biopsy, sex identiﬁcation, and selection of
female embryos for transfer. Clinical PGD cycles were started
in late 1989, and we reported the ﬁrst pregnancies in the

world in 1990 (217). The ﬁrst two were twin pregnancies
and both delivered in July of that year. Unfortunately, one
of the second set of twins was stillborn.
Although we had conﬁrmed that the sex of the embryos
selected for transfer had been accurately identiﬁed by means
of chorion villus sampling and karyotyping later in pregnancy, a subsequent singleton pregnancy was male. This
was the ﬁrst misdiagnosis after PGD and highlighted the precariousness of basing a diagnosis on the result from a single
cell. In this case, presumably the misdiagnosis was caused
by failure of ampliﬁcation. Complete failure of ampliﬁcation,
failure to amplify of one of the two parental alleles at random
(allele drop out [ADO]), and susceptibility to contamination,
particularly product contamination, all remain problematic
for single-cell ampliﬁcation.
For ampliﬁcation of unique target sequences from a single cell, for example, to detect a mutation or a DNA marker,
one round of PCR ampliﬁcation is not sufﬁcient; partial
ampliﬁcation and then a second full ampliﬁcation of the
product is required. Holding and Monk, working with mouse
embryos, were the ﬁrst to publish success with two rounds of
ampliﬁcation, using ‘‘nested’’ primers in which the second
pair of primers recognizes sequences in the initial PCR product (218). Meanwhile, we succeeded in amplifying a short
fragment including the common cystic ﬁbrosis deletion
from single human oocytes (219), and this work eventually
led to the ﬁrst live birth following PGD of cystic ﬁbrosis in
1992 (220).
Later in the 1990s and early 2000s, several hundred such
PCR-based single-cell protocols were published in a range of
monogenic diseases. Notably in 1998, the ﬁrst PGD for a
single-gene defect predisposing to cancer was reported, in
this case a mutation in the APC gene predisposing to familial
polyposis coli (221). Over this period, there were technologic
advances, including capillary sequencing, which enabled
the detection of short PCR products labeled with ﬂuorescent
nucleotides. This made it possible to accurately determine
the length of the ampliﬁed products, including highly polymorphic short tandem repeats (STRs), and the combination
of STR markers ﬂanking the affected gene together with the
mutation site itself became the criterion standard for PGD
protocols, reducing the possibility of errors from ADO at
any single locus (222).
The use of ﬂuorescent PCR and capillary sequencing also
facilitated the use of highly multiplexed PCR reactions, generating tens of PCR products from single cells. For a number of
blood-related inherited conditions, particularly hemoglobinopathies such as b-thalassamia, this then enabled not only
the single-gene defect itself to be diagnosed, but also markers
across the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) on the short arm of
chromosome 6 could be examined and tissue matched to an
existing affected child in the family. If an unaffected and
matched embryo could be identiﬁed, this opened up the possibility of isolating HLA-matched cord blood stem cells for
transplantation to the affected child. The ﬁrst birth after
PGD of b-thalassamia and HLA matching was reported in
2001 (223), and since then an increasing number of sick children have had stem cell transplantation and been cured of
their disease (224).

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
225
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

THE GENOMIC REVOLUTION

PROSPECTS FOR PGD IN THE COMING DECADES

PCR involves cycling the temperature from low annealing
temperatures to high denaturing temperatures to separate
the products in each cycle. This requires the use of a heatstable DNA polymerase, Taq polymerase, isolated from a thermophilic bacterium. In the early 2000s, a DNA polymerase,
F29, with the ability to unravel double-stranded DNA, was
isolated from a bacteriophage. This polymerase makes it
possible to amplify DNA at a relatively low and constant temperature, so-called isothermal multiple displacement ampliﬁcation (MDA). When used with single cells, MDA produces
micrograms of DNA product, for the ﬁrst time similar to the
amount in a prenatal chorion villus sample, and it was
possible to envisage using genomic technologies at the
single-cell level (Robinson et al., 2003).
Multiplex ﬂuorescent PCR protocols for PGD require
labor-intensive optimization of family- and diseasespeciﬁc tests, which limit access and often delay treatment.
One improvement was the introduction of disease-speciﬁc
panels of markers informative for a majority of couples at
risk of a particular disease, so-called preimplantation genetic
haplotyping (225). With MDA, however, sufﬁcient DNA is
available for analysis with genome-wide platforms. One of
the ﬁrst platforms to become available were singlenucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping microarrays.
With these SNP microarrays, it is possible to genotype hundreds of thousands of these markers across each of the 23
pairs of chromosomes in a single test. SNPs are variations
in the DNA sequence at speciﬁc positions which mostly do
not affect gene function and where the variant nucleotide
is present in a signiﬁcant proportion of the general population. Thus, biallelic SNPs in which the sequence varies between two nucleotides, generically referred to as A and B,
can be used as ubiquitous genetic markers with an average
one informative SNP in every 3 kb.
STR markers are highly polymorphic, and in some cases
there can be a different number of repeats on each of the
four parental chromosomes. Biallelic SNP markers can only
distinguish two out of the four. However, by determining
the genotypes of the parents and working out which of the
AB alleles at each position is present on individual chromosomes (phasing) with the use of, for example, an existing
child, four different sets of genome-wide SNP markers can
be identiﬁed. Karyomapping uses a bead array to genotype
300,000 SNPs genome wide, with mendelian analysis and
an algorithm to avoid errors caused by ADO (226, 227). The
main advantage of karyomapping is that any single-gene
defect (or combination of defects) within the regions covered
by the SNP markers can be diagnosed in one universal test,
based on the SNP markers present around the affected gene(s).
HLA matching, for example, simply involves examining the
SNP markers on chromosome 6. Finally, because there are
markers for each parental chromosome, meiotic trisomies,
monosomies, and subchromosomal deletions can be identiﬁed. Combining PGD by means of karyomapping with aneuploidy testing has improved clinical pregnancy and live birth
rates and has now replaced the use of STR markers in all but
exceptional cases.

The main development, which is already taking place, is the
replacement of targeted sequencing with the use of SNP microarrays with next-generation sequencing (NGS). In 2014,
the ﬁrst $1,000 whole-genome sequencing was achieved,
and the cost of sequencing continues to fall. Several early reports have demonstrated the use of NGS-based testing for
PGD, including the ﬁrst demonstration of combined chromosome copy number analysis and targeted haplotyping for mutation and marker analysis (228). At present, the cost per
sample of using NGS is greater than microarrays, and the
challenge will be to bring the cost down for patients.
Recently, there have been breakthroughs in both gene
therapy for b-thalassemia (229) and in genome editing of human embryos (230). b-Thalassemia is the most prevalent inherited disorder worldwide, and a potential cure with the
use of autologous blood cells is enormously signiﬁcant. However, for most other single-gene defects affecting multiple cell
types throughout the body, gene therapy may offer only a
partial cure. The efﬁciency of genome editing with the use
of CRISPR-Cas9 has yet to be demonstrated deﬁnitively,
and the risk of any off-target editing remains a barrier for
clinical application. Because single-gene defects, whatever
their inheritance patterns, are present typically in only onehalf of the gametes of the carrier parent, selection of unaffected embryos following PGD is likely to remain the simplest
and safest approach to preventing the birth of affected children. For couples, PGD is therefore likely to remain an important alternative to prenatal diagnosis, particularly when
combined with aneuploidy testing to identify nonviable genomically unbalanced embryos.

EVOLUTION OF PREIMPLANTATION
GENETIC SCREENING
Santiago Munne, Ph.D.
Preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) was ﬁrst clinically
applied (231) 25 years ago and was based on the observation
that many human embryos, contrary to most other species
studied, are chromosomally abnormal. Embryos with numeric
chromosome abnormalities in all of their cells (aneuploid,
haploid, or polyploid) seldom implant, and if they do the
vast majority miscarry, with a few exceptions (trisomies for
chromosomes 13, 18, and 21 and gonosomes). Therefore, we
hypothesized that the selection of euploid embryos for transfer should improve implantation rates and reduce miscarriage
rates, improving ongoing pregnancy rates per transfer (231).
Assuming no embryo damage from the sampling or biopsy
of the embryo, no errors of diagnosis, and no selfcorrection of abnormalities, single-embryo transfers of alleuploid embryos should provide an ongoing pregnancy rate
per cycle similar to the cumulative rate obtained by replacing
all undiagnosed embryos one by one. As I will discuss,
currently PGS improves implantation rates, reduces miscarriage rates, and improves ongoing pregnancy rates per transfer (232–236) (Fig. 10) but it does not yet achieve the last

226
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 10

Summary of CRT on PGS v2. *Frozen for subsequent cycles. 1. Yang et al., Mol Cytogenet 2012;5:24; 2. Scott et al., Fertil Steril 2013;100:697–703;
3. Forman et al., Fertil Steril 2013;100:100–7.e1; 4. Rubio et al., Fertil Steril 2017;107:1122–9. 5. Munne et al., ASRM 2017.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

premise, owing to either embryo damage during biopsy or
technical shortcomings, although the gap has been
narrowing.
Without embryo damage, technical error, or selfcorrection of abnormalities, one would expect that the more
chromosome abnormalities, the better the selection of embryos. The frequency of meiotic errors resulting in aneuploid
oocytes and embryos increases with advancing maternal age,
but it does not seem to be related to cohort size (237). In that
study (237), blastocysts analyzed by means of array comparative genome hybridization (aCGH) showed similar euploidy
rates regardless of whether the patient produced fewer than
5 or more than 10 blastocysts, with a range of 70%–67% in
egg donors, 53%–69% in patients <35 years old, 49%–51%
in patients 35–39 years old, 34%–41% in patients 40–42 years
old, and 17% in patients >42 years old. These ﬁndings have
been conﬁrmed later in much larger data sets with the use
of either aCGH or next-generation sequencing (NGS)
(Fig. 11). However, what does change with cohort size is the
chance of a patient having at least one euploid embryo. To
have a R95% chance of ﬁnding a euploid embryo, four blastocysts need to be produced in egg donors, ﬁve to seven in patients <35 years old, the same for patients 35–39 years old,
and more than ten for patients 40–42 years old. However, if
a euploid blastocyst is replaced, we demonstrated (238) that
euploid embryos implant equally well at any age, at least up
to 42 years. This ﬁnding supports the original hypothesis
that the major cause of decline in embryonic potential with
advancing maternal age is chromosome abnormalities, and
that if euploid embryos are produced and replaced, the
maternal age effect on implantation mostly disappears.
But how was PGS developed? As with many scientiﬁc developments, it involved a conﬂuence of disconnected ﬁelds,
adding another step to previous ones, and lots of serendipity.
In this case, I had just ﬁnished my Ph.D. and, after asking for a

job with the fathers of preimplantation genetic diagnosis
(PGD) (Alan Handyside, Yuri Verlinsky, Buck Strom, Mark
Hughes, Jacques Cohen, and Jamie Grifo), which all rejected
me, I went anyway to visit Cornell because Jacques said
‘‘but you can visit us anytime.’’ So the week after his rejection
I drove from Pittsburgh to visit. The following week, Henry
Malter, another pioneer in micromanipulation, quit his job
and I was hired (ﬁrst lucky event). My work was going to be
on antioxidants (good Lord, I was not even taking vitamins
then). Luckily, Jamie Grifo’s team was sexing embryos with
probes that required antibodies. A bad ﬁxation guaranteed
super-bad results and I was able to improve the ﬁxation
and was recruited to the team. Through a second serendipity
I met Ulli Weier, who was testing the ﬁrst ﬂuorescently
labeled probes. It was not commercially available yet, and I
was lucky to be the ﬁrst to try them in human blastomeres,
thereby being able to perform the ﬁrst PGS clinical cases
with the use of ﬁve chromosome probes and achieving the
ﬁrst PGS baby (231). But Cornell lacked a ready source of embryos for research at the time, and my third stroke of luck,
Luca Gianaroli, happened to be visiting Jacques’ lab and
invited me to Bologna with an offer of available material
and ample assistance. The conﬂuence of micromanipulation
techniques developed mostly at Cohen’s Lab (i.e., the use of
acid Tyrode to do assisted hatching and thereby obtain a better day-3 biopsy), the ﬂuorescently labeled probes of Ulli Weier, and the willingness of Luca Gianaroli to contribute
material and continued support resulted in what we now
call PGS v1, that is, cleavage-stage biopsy and ﬂuorescence
in situ hybridization testing of embryos (231, 239). This
collaboration resulted in 100 papers. Talk about getting to
be the ﬁrst to use a technique in something new and
basking in your laurels.
The party abruptly ended in 2007 when a series of papers
coming from northern Europe showed that in their hands PGS

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
227
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 11

Frequency of chromosome abnormalities in human blastocysts analyzed by means of NGS. n > 100,000 embryos. Cooper Genomics data, with
mosaics not reported (<40% classiﬁed as normal and R40% as abnormal).
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

v1 did not work or was even detrimental (240). We were astonished by their results because our experience, >10 years
already, was to the contrary. Granted, if 50% of embryos
were abnormal, we were not getting 100% improvement in
implantation, but we were nevertheless getting a signiﬁcant
improvement. We scrutinized and combed the Mastenbroek
et al. paper (240) for a clue, and deep in the paper there is
one line stating that in 20% of the embryos they biopsied
they did not obtain cells but replaced those embryos anyway.
Compared with the control group those embryos (an involuntary third arm) had one-half the control group implantation
rate. It was their biopsy (aside from other details). We dismissed that work for several more years without recognizing
that the technique was too difﬁcult for most labs to perform
correctly. It was not until Richard Scott and his team (241)
published a clinical randomized trial (CRT) comparing the implantation rate of cleavage-stage with blastocyst biopsies and
untested embryos, which showed that the ﬁrst was detrimental, but not the second. The ﬁeld largely abandoned
cleavage-stage biopsy, but by then PGS (v1) was almost
dead. I remember that at the Rome ESHRE meeting Dr. Geraedts presented the European Society for Human Reproduction and Embryology consortium PGD data with a big smile
when showing a sharp decrease in PGS procedures. At the
time, as for most of its history, the Consortium was not proPGS. The Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis International
Society was created by Verlinsky, Gianaroli, Simpson, and
me to promote PGS.
I have not yet discussed polar body (PB) analysis. This
method was pioneered by Yury Verlinsky’s team, one of the
only groups practicing it during PGS v1 times, together
with Italian (Gianaroli and others) and German (Karsten
Held and others) groups, owing to legal prohibition of embryo
biopsy in these two countries. However, PB analysis involves
double-testing of ﬁrst and second PBs, having proved that
many aneuploidies are not resolved as such until the second
meiotic division. More important, 30% of abnormalities are
postmeiotic and 10% paternal in origin, therefore undetectable by means of PB analysis. The biopsy of PBs is almost
as difﬁcult, or more so, than cleavage-stage biopsy. Finally,

the switch to 24-chromosome analysis meant double amount
and cost to analyze PBs than single samples (either single
blastomeres or single TE biopsies), and PB analysis has been
mostly discontinued.
PGS v2 was made possible thanks to previous improvements in culture media which allowed blastocyst culture
and biopsy, vitriﬁcation which provided plenty of time for genetic analysis, but mainly the push to analyze all 24 chromosomes with new molecular techniques (aCGH, singlenucleotide polymorphism [SNP] arrays, quantitative polymerase chain reaction [qPCR], and NGS). This second wave
of technology took quite long to arrive after the ﬁrst one,
and not all surfers had the stamina to keep aﬂoat. Reprogenetics was the ﬁrst commercial PGD lab, but we almost
went under in between waves. Thanks to the hiring of new
star Dagan Wells, we got new blood, skills, and a proper
British accent, and we hit it with CGH and thereafter aCGH
(242).
Array CGH was the workhorse of PGS v2 in many labs
until the advent of NGS. It consists of 3,000 large fragments
of human DNA arrayed into a glass slide and spaced at about
1-Mb intervals across each chromosome, allowing accurate
copy number analysis as well as counting of regions as small
as 6 Mb. The DNA of the cell(s) to be tested is ampliﬁed,
labeled in green, and cohybridized with the array with the
use of control DNA labeled in red in a 1:1 ratio. Analysis is
performed by scanning the array and measuring the intensity
of both hybridization signals (green and red) relative to each
probe (called the logR ratio). If the segment of the chromosome analyzed is euploid, then there would be an equal
amount of red and green and the software reads the result
as yellow and a 1:1 ratio. Because the control is euploid,
this would classify that probe as also euploid. If it shifts to
the red (a 1:2 ratio) it means that there is more control than
test DNA, indicating the presence of a monosomy; whereas
if it shifts to green, there is more test DNA, a 3:2 ratio, and
thus a trisomy. A whole chromosome could be trisomic or
monosomic, or just a fragment of a chromosome (segmental
abnormalities, translocations). Although aCGH was developed years before its use in PGS, it was the Bluegnome

228
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
(Graham Snudden, Nick Haan, and Tony Gordon) software
and reagents that made it accessible to most laboratories.
The aCGH method requires whole-genome ampliﬁcation
(WGA) of the biopsied cells. However, different WGA methods
produce different ampliﬁcation biases, amplifying some areas
better than others. There has been a lingering debate (usually
between Drs. Treff and Scott vs. the rest of the PGS teams)
about whether these ampliﬁcation biases are critical or not.
The biases are normalized by the fact that control DNA is
also ampliﬁed at the same time. The evidence suggests that
the error rates for aCGH are similar to those of qPCR and
SNP arrays. Two CRTs have been performed with aCGH
showing signiﬁcant improvement in pregnancy outcomes
(232, 235).
Another technique that was initially used in PGS v2 but
has now been mostly relegated to PGD of monogenic diseases
(by means of karyomapping), are SNP arrays. At the time
analyzing >200,000 SNPs simultaneously, it provided quantitative and/or qualitative chromosome copy number (243).
About 2.5% of nucleotides are polymorphic in the population,
and these biallelic SNPs, in which one of two possible bases
are present (A or B), can be genotyped with the use of SNP arrays. By analysis of the intensity ratio of A and B alleles at
heterozygous loci, it is possible to detect duplications and deletions of whole chromosomes or small regions. In euploid regions, SNPs would appear as three bands representing AA,
AB, and BB combinations of loci at a ratio of either 0, 0.5,
or 1. In trisomic regions, the ratio at heterozygous loci appears
as two bands representing those that are either AAB or ABB.
In monosomic regions, there will be a heterozygous band and
only A or B. One peculiarity of this technique, though not very
useful, is that if the parents are also analyzed, one can determine the origin of the abnormality. I say it is not very useful
because >90% of defects are maternal in origin. However, the
karyomapping approach developed by Alan Handyside is very
useful for haplotyping and detection of monogenic diseases,
as well as ﬁngerprinting embryos in case of a mix-up.
The laboratory of Nathan Treff and Richard Scott was
very proliﬁc in developing PGS v2 technology, from the
application of SNP arrays (also developed by Natera’s Johnson and Rabinowitz team) to the development of qPCR, targeted NGS, and the performing of several key clinical
randomized tests (233, 234, 241, 243). In contrast to aCGH
and SNP array, which were intended to be comprehensive
and covering all regions of each chromosome, qPCR was
designed as a fast but low-resolution method, testing only
four sites per chromosome. With qPCR there is a preampliﬁcation step, followed by a multiplex PCR reaction performed
on the sample directly, without WGA, which ampliﬁes about
four sequences on each arm of each chromosome. Rapid
quantiﬁcation by means of real-time qPCR is then used for
comparison of copy number across the genome. This allows
for results in 4 hours, and it has been extensively validated
and several CRTs performed (233, 234), but the trade-off is its
low resolution which does not allow for the detection of
segmental abnormalities. With mounting evidence that transfer of vitriﬁed embryos in a nonstimulated cycle improves
pregnancy outcome over replacement on the same stimulated
cycle, this technique has lost its advantage.

The current criterion standard for PGS is now blastocyst
biopsy, vitriﬁcation, analysis of the biopsy with the use of
NGS, and transfer in a thaw cycle (244). This allows ample
time for analysis, better endometrial environment for implantation, and centralization of laboratory services with
increasing sequencing capacity, which drives lower prices.
The most common approach used for NGS was developed
by Wells et al. (244). It consists of amplifying the DNA of
the biopsy by means of WGA, and then the biopsy DNA is
chopped into small fragments and linker oligonucleotides
are ligated to the fragments, which can be used also as ‘‘barcodes.’’ The fragments are massively sequenced in parallel by
the successive addition and removal of nucleotides. The intensity is measured either by counting protons released in
each reaction or by measuring ﬂuorescence from the ﬂuorescently labeled nucleotides incorporated. Improving imaging
analysis and chemistries is allowing increasing resolution
and capacity at decreasing machine prices. Each fragment
sequence is then compared with a reference DNA and assigned a locus. Once a certain read depth of fragments is
reached, the analysis is performed. By counting fragments
in a region and comparing them with the rest of the genome,
one can detect if there is a change in copy number in that region. One CRT has been performed so far with this technique
(236). An alternative to this NGS approach is to not use WGA
and instead applying targeted NGS (developed by the Treff
laboratory).
With the use of barcodes, the simultaneous analysis of up
to 64 embryos in the same run is possible, thus reducing cost,
although at the expense of resolution. However, even at that
level, the resolution obtained is superior to all other PGS techniques and cheaper. Accordingly, prices for the genetics part
of PGS have been decreasing. Puzzlingly (I am being
sarcastic), embryo biopsy prices in the U.S. have not changed,
still at $1,500–$2,000 for a procedure that lasts 1–2 minutes
per embryo. This will change with noninvasive PGS, which I
will discuss shortly.
In addition to pricing advantages, NGS allows for higher
resolution and thus the detection of mosaicism at the 20%–
80% ratio of normal-to-abnormal cells in a typical 5-cell
blastocyst biopsy (245). Although other PGS v2 techniques,
such as aCGH, can detect mosaicism, they do it at much narrower ranges (246). We have shown that euploid/aneuploid
mosaic embryos detected by NGS are relatively common,
20% of blastocysts, and have an intermediate potential between euploid and aneuploid embryos, implanting less and
miscarrying more, but resulting in some live births (245), so
far all chromosomally normal (246). It also seems that the
more abnormal cells or chromosomes involved in the mosaicism, the poorer the prognosis of those mosaic embryos to
develop to term (245). As such, Grifo, Wells, Greco, and I proposed that these embryos should be considered as a separate
third category when selecting embryos for transfer, prioritizing the transfer of euploid ones, but using mosaic embryos
for transfer if other euploid ones are not available or no other
cycles of IVF are possible. This reduces further the risk of false
positive and negative results, because now euploid and aneuploid embryos are better characterized, at the expense of
creating a gray zone of mosaic embryos. NGS thus improves

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
229
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
embryo selection over other techniques, as recently demonstrated by obtaining better pregnancy outcomes when
comparing NGS and aCGH techniques (247). Some had
argued that a mosaic result is a technical artefact, but the
fact that they have a different pregnancy outcome indicates
a biologic cause.
Overall, there are at least ﬁve CRTs (232–236) showing an
improvement in pregnancy outcomes, per transfer, when PGS
is performed. Some of these studies were small and
underpowered, but a recent large multicentric one also
showed positive results in patients 35 years of age and
older, where aneuploidy rates are higher (235). This is the
same result observed in the Society for Assisted
Reproductive Technology (SART) report of 2014 for all U.S.
centers reporting. There will be some debate about why PGS
does not show improvement in results in the young group
when on average 30%–40% of blastocysts in that group are
also aneuploid. The reason could be that the STAR trial
(235) and the SART data are ‘‘real-world’’ experience,
involving not only centers with lots of experience in
blastocyst biopsy (actually, many of those did not want to
participate in the STAR trial, because their patients were
already convinced) but also centers with little experience.
This suggests that blastocyst biopsy might not be as benign
as we think (241). After all, it has not been standardized
and is operator dependent. As an alternative to blastocyst
biopsy, an emerging body of research is showing that the
embryo sheds DNA into the media and blastocele ﬂuid and
that DNA in that environment is now quantiﬁable and
analyzable with the use of NGS. Although concordance
with TE biopsy is still not optimal, in a couple of years we
should see noninvasive sampling of embryos as a valid
alternative to TE biopsy, at least for PGS. On the other
hand, deeper and cheaper sequencing will merge PGS, PGD,
and carrier screening into the same procedure. That could
be PGS v3.

REPAIRING THE DAMAGED
EMBRYO: CRISPR-CAS9
TECHNOLOGY
Cristina Eguizabal, Ph.D.,
Nuria Montserrat, Ph.D., and
Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, Ph.D.
THE HISTORY OF GENE-EDITING TECHNOLOGY
DNA damage can occur after exposure to ionizing radiation or
chemotherapy, during the DNA replication process, or after
experimental manipulation through the action of endonucleases. Fortunately, the DNA repair machinery helps to repair
this damage, preventing DNA mutations that can cause disease, and this is the basis of the gene-editing concept. There
are two key repair pathways for DNA double-strand breaks
(DSBs): nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) and homologous
recombination (HR) (248).

HR was used in the 1980s to insert and repair genes in
mammalian cells. Drs. Oliver Smithies, Mario Capecchi, and
Martin Evans, who together pioneered HR-mediated gene editing in mouse embryos, later shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology in 2007 for this work. In the 1990s, Dr. Maria Jasin and
colleagues further improved gene targeting in mammalian
cells with the use of HR when they used the yeast homing
endonuclease I-SceI. These next-generation endonucleases
include zinc ﬁnger nucleases (ZFNs) and transcription
activator–like effector nucleases (TALENs), which combined
the DNA-binding speciﬁcity of zinc ﬁngers or TALE transcription factors from plants with the DNA-cutting activity
of the FokI endonuclease (248).
One of the major breakthroughs achieved in the ﬁeld of
gene editing happened in the late 1980s, when a strange topology at the 30 end of the alkaline phosphatase gene in Escherichia coli was discovered. This was the ﬁrst known
description of a clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) array. In 2005, the molecular mechanism of the transcription of CRISPR arrays into RNA was
demonstrated, which is then cleaved and loaded into
CRISPR-associated (Cas) proteins (Cas9) (248).
For many years, researchers had been searching for a tool
to easily induce mutations in a targeted fashion. Although
some progress had been made with the use of engineered
meganucleases, ZFNs, and TALENs, these systems had
numerous limitations. They were either expensive or labor
intensive, or both, because the targeting mechanisms were
based on protein–nucleic acid interactions, thereby requiring
a custom-designed protein for each genetic locus of interest.
The promise of RNA-guided nuclease activity afforded by
CRISPR-based approaches led numerous groups to immediately recognize that this technology could potentially be
used to induce targeted DSBs in eukaryotes, which previously
could be accomplished only with much difﬁculty. DSBs produced by either previously available technologies or
CRISPR-based systems are repaired by low-ﬁdelity DNA
repair pathways, leading to the production of indels, a class
of mutations characterized by the random insertion or deletion of nucleotides at the site of the DSB.
As described previously, there are four basic nuclease
technologies: engineered meganucleases, ZFNs, TALENs,
and CRISPR-Cas9 nucleases. The differences between them
are described in detail in Table 6.

THE RELEVANCE OF GENOME-EDITING
TECHNOLOGIES FOR POTENTIAL
THERAPEUTICS
Gene-editing technologies are powerful tools for basic
research, but the ﬁnal goal is to translate these technologies
into therapeutic applications. The potential use of gene editing in the clinic emerged from the idea that the best way to
treat monogenic diseases would be to develop a method for
correcting the disease-associated mutation, but it would be
necessary to make more dramatic changes to the genome to
cure diseases with multifactorial origins, which are more
common. The use of genome editing to cure monogenic disease is conceptually simple, but the true power of genome-

230
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

TABLE 6
The variety of gene-editing tools: a detailed description of the differences between engineered meganucleases, ZFNs, TALENs, and CRISPRCas9.
Characteristic

ZFNs

TALENs

CRISPR-Cas9

Recognition site

14–40 bp.
Protein-DNA

9–18 bp per ZFN
monomer, 18–36 bp
per ZFN pair. ProteinDNA

14–20 bp per TALEN
monomer, 28–40 bp
per TALEN pair.
Protein-DNA

Speciﬁcity

Small number of
positional
mismatches tolerated
Difﬁcult to target non–Grich sequences

Small number of
positional
mismatches tolerated
0
5 targeted base must be
a T for each TALEN

Efﬁciency
Design feasibility and
delivery

Small number of
positional
mismatches tolerated
Targeting novel
sequences often
results in low
efﬁciency
Low
Time consuming and
labor intensive

22 bp (20 bp guide
sequence þ 2 bp
PAM sequence for
Streptococcus
pyogenes Cas9); up
to 44 bp for doublenicking.
RNA-DNA
Positional and multiple
consecutive
mismatches tolerated
Targeted sequence must
precede a PAM

Unknown

High
Difﬁcult construction,
difﬁcult to assemble,
and low delivery
Unknown

Very high
Very rapid construction
and easy delivery

Immunogenicity
Ease of multiplexing
Methylation sensitivity
Safety
Cost

Low
Sensitive
Unknown
VVVV

High
Difﬁcult construction,
difﬁcult to assemble,
and low delivery
Likely low, because ZFNs
are based on human
protein scaffold
Low
Sensitive
Safe in clinical trial
VVVV

Low
Sensitive
Unknown
VV

High
No
Safe in clinical trial
V

Targeting constraints

Meganucleases

Unknown

Note: Cas9 ¼ CRISPR-associated protein 9; CRISPR ¼ clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats; PAM ¼ Protospacer Adjacent Motif; TALEN ¼ transcription activator–like effector
nuclease; ZFN ¼ zinc ﬁnger nuclease.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

editing tools is that they provide a mechanism for making
more sophisticated genomic changes, which can be used to
cure more common diseases or to modify their course. Indeed,
there are currently several companies (CRISPR Therapeutics,
Cellectis, Sangamo Therapeutics, Caribou Biosciences, Editas
Company, Precision Biosciences, and Intellia Therapeutics)
developing gene editing–based approaches to treat diseases,
such as sickle cell anemia, b-thalassemia, cystic ﬁbrosis,
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, hemophilia, alpha1antitrypsin deﬁciency, lysosomal storage disorders, Huntington disease, human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) 1 resistance/infection/immunization, hepatitis B virus, chimeric
antigen receptor T-cell, and others.

FORTHCOMING POTENTIAL USES OF
GENE-EDITING TECHNOLOGY IN THE
REPRODUCTIVE FIELD
There are many potential uses for the CRISPR-Cas9 technology in the reproductive ﬁeld, including those that target
pluripotent stem cells, gametes, or embryos (249). The ﬁrst
hypothetic choice for preventing a genetic disorder in progeny is to use gene editing to correct the mutation in pluripotent stem cells (induced pluripotent stem cells or somatic cell
nuclear transfer–human embryonic stem cells) that have been
obtained from a patient with a speciﬁc disease. The pluripotent stem cells are ideal for researching technologies to edit
genes because they can be grown faster and more easily. After

gene correction, these pluripotent stem cells can be differentiated in vitro toward germ cells (oocytes or sperm) for future
potential uses with the use of assisted reproductive technology (250).
In the gametes, it seems that spermatogonial stem cells
(SSCs) are the best male cell type for treating male infertility
(especially if the patient has problems generating mature
sperm).
In contrast to male gametes, oocytes are much easier to
genetically manipulate, although, at present, it is difﬁcult to
use gene-editing applications on them owing to the low number collected from the patient as well as the poor efﬁciency of
the gene-editing process. To date, it has been demonstrated
that gene-editing technologies (TALEN and CRISPR-Cas9)
can be used to eliminate mitochondrial (mt) DNA molecules
in oocytes or embryos in mouse models (251). Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte and colleagues have used mitochondriatargeting restriction enzymes and TALENs in mammalian oocytes for the ﬁrst time. To determine whether the enzymes
could be used to edit human mtDNA, they fused mouse oocytes with ﬁbroblast cells from patients with one of two mitochondrial disorders (Leber hereditary optic neuropathy or
neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa). Mutant mtDNA was still detectable, although at lower
levels, after TALEN mRNA injection. Mutated mtDNA usually
causes disease only if >60%–75% of a cell’s mitochondria
have the error, so the reduction that they observed was
more than enough for the phenotype to disappear (251).

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
231
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
The correction of the mutations in the germ line could
permit the patients to produce mutation-free gametes, and
consequently produce healthy embryos and progeny. However, there are few scenarios in which the application of
CRISPR-Cas9 technology could be of beneﬁt for people with
risk of having children with monogenic diseases, for example,
in families with autosomal recessive diseases, in couples
where one partner is affected with an autosomal dominant
disease, and in patients who are homozygous for an autosomal dominant disease (Huntington disease, polycystic kidney disease, achondroplasia, Marfan syndrome, myotonic
dystrophy type 1, and others) (249), in a rare form of chromosomal aberrations (robertsonian translocations), and in
genetic syndromes (45,X [Turner syndrome], 47,XXY [Klinefelter syndrome], and Y chromosome deletions [oligozoospermia and azoospermia]). Finally, another situation for
correction would be the mutations in human embryos that
we will discuss later.

STATE-OF-THE-ART OF THE USE OF
GENE EDITING IN EMBRYOS
From 2015 to date, a few studies were published about
CRISPR-Cas9 editing in human embryos to verify its speciﬁcity, efﬁciency, and ﬁdelity as well as to understand human
development. Basically, the editing system is directly microinjected into the cytoplasm or pronuclei of zygotes or metaphase II (MII) oocytes, and later some type of screening is
needed to identify embryos with a correct edited genome
and any off-target modiﬁcations. In general, the efﬁciency
of genomic editing in embryos is low. The main problem is
the generation of mosaic embryos as a result of inefﬁcient
nuclease cutting and/or inaccurate DNA repair before the embryo undergoes cleavage. Still, several studies in different animal models from rats to pigs, even up to monkeys, have
demonstrated the achievability of gene editing in animals
(252–255). The efﬁciency of genomic modiﬁcations in
mammalian zygotes ranges from 0.5% to 40.9% of injected
zygotes with the use of TALENs or Cas9 technologies. Low
rates of mosaicism have also been achieved in nonhuman
primate embryos (255).
In 2015, the technique of CRISPR-Cas9 editing was also
performed in human zygotes to verify its efﬁciency, speciﬁcity, and ﬁdelity (256). A Chinese group injected 86 donated
tripronuclear (3PN) zygotes with CRISPR-Cas9; 82.6% of the
embryos survived the injection, and 51.9% of the genomeedited zygotes were successfully spliced, but only 5.6% of
the total contained the correct genetic material inserted
through homologous recombination. The gene-edited zygotes
were mosaic, with results similar to ﬁndings in other model
systems. Furthermore, a large number of ‘‘off-target’’ mutations were identiﬁed, which probably had been introduced
by the CRISPR-Cas9 complex acting in other parts of the
genome, intrinsic abnormalities of the 3PN zygotes, or a combination of both.
Later, another Chinese group injected 213 3PN zygotes,
which resulted in some of the embryos taking on a mutation
that modiﬁes an immune-cell gene called CCR5 (257). This
mutation is resistant to HIV infection owing to the CCR5 pro-

tein alteration which prevents the virus from entering into T
cells. Genetic analysis showed that four of the 26 embryos targeted were successfully modiﬁed, with similar results to Liang
et al. However, some embryos contained an unmodiﬁed
CCR5D32 mutation and others had acquired different mutations. In conclusion, the main advance of that paper was
the precise introduction of a speciﬁc genetic modiﬁcation in
human zygotes by means of CRISPR-Cas9. Very recently,
the ﬁrst report that demonstrates in diploid (2N) human embryos the correction of the hemoglobin subunit beta (HBB)
gene and one in the gene encoding the enzyme glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH) (258) has been published.
These common genetic defects cause different types of anemia. As we mentioned before, previous work has already
shown that CRISPR-Cas9 technology can be used to perform
speciﬁc changes in triploid human zygotes, so these results
from the Tang group were not unexpected. The limitations
presented in this work were the limited number of ten embryos used compared with previous reports and, similarly to
other reports, the generation of mosaic embryos.
Recently, a major milestone in the ﬁeld of gene editing has
been published. Mitalipov et al. addressed several steps to
improve the precision and the safety of the CRISPR-Cas9 technique. As we mentioned above, to date the CRISPR-Cas9 technology used in embryos has frequently generated mosaics by
repairing the mutation in some cells but also introducing a
high rate of unwanted off-target mutations or extra mutations
in the targeted gene (nonhomologous repair) (Fig. 12A). However, Mitalipov’s team considerably improved on previous efforts by injecting the CRISPR-Cas9 components together with
the patient sperm directly into normal MII oocytes (259). Until
now, the Cas9 complex had been injected directly into the
zygote (Fig. 12A, top). Remarkably, they now found high efﬁciency of homologous repair, no evidence of off-target genetic
changes, and only a single mosaic generated in an experiment
involving 58 human embryos (259) (Fig. 12A).
From a developmental point of view, Kathy Niakan and
colleagues for the ﬁrst time optimized the protocol to knock
out the OCT4 gene with the sole purpose of understanding
the basic principle of human embryonic development, rather
than correcting a speciﬁc mutation in human embryos as in
previous reports (Fig. 12B). Understanding the basic and
fundamental aspects of early human embryos will have a direct
impact in clinical applications for reproductive medicine (260).
Obviously, more research in animal models is needed to
improve the safety and efﬁciency of this method for germline
correction, especially in human embryos, through genome
editing.

GENE EDITING FOR TREATMENT
OF GERMLINE GENETIC DISEASES:
THE CASE OF MITOCHONDRIAL DISEASES
Mitochondrial diseases are caused by a mutation in a proportion of the mtDNA molecules present exclusively in the
oocyte. Mutations in the mtDNA are transmitted exclusively
via the oocyte, which can carry between 10,000 to 100,000
mtDNA copies, with the most severe forms causing death
soon after birth. Although there is at this time no cure for

232
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 12

A

Sperm carrying mutation

WT

CRISPR/Cas9

WT

Wild Type oocyte
WT

Zygote injection

Mut

WT Mosaic

Mosaic embryo

S-phase

Sperm with mutation + CRISPR/Cas9

WT

Mut

Wild type oocyte
M-phase

WT
MII oocyte injection

B

Wild Type Sperm

HR
Fully HR-corrected
No mosaic embryo

CRISPR/Cas9
6h later
Partially NHEJ-targeted
embryo (mosaic indel
mutations)

Wild Type oocyte

WT
Zygote injection

WT

S-phase

WT

W
WT
T

CRISPR targeting at > 1
cell stage embryo

Fully NHEJ-targeted
embryo (mosaic indel
mutations)

Use of gene editing in human embryos. (A) Therapeutically oriented use of CRISPR-Cas9. Schematic of gene correction with the use of CRISPR-Cas9
in zygotes (top); CRISPR-Cas9 was coinjected with sperm into metaphase II (MII) oocytes during intracytoplasmic sperm injection. This technique,
described by Mitalipov et al., eliminates mosaicism (bottom). (B) Nontherapeutically oriented use of CRISPR-Cas9. Niakan et al. described the highly
efﬁcient nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) mechanism to target the OCT4 gene in human embryos.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

mitochondrial diseases, scientiﬁc advances in this ﬁeld have
provided new ways to prevent disease transmission. One
mitochondrial disease prevention method is preimplantation
genetic diagnosis (PGD), a technique in which cells taken
from in vitro fertilized (IVF) embryos before uterine implantation are screened to select healthy embryos, but this is not a
valuable test for all patients. In recent years, a novel method
of mtDNA replacement therapy has emerged as a promising
approach for preventing mitochondrial disease transmission,
including four main techniques for mtDNA replacement:
germinal vesicular transfer, MII spindle-chromosome complex transfer, pronuclear transfer, and polar body transfer.
Recent studies in Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte’s laboratory demonstrated that it is possible to use gene-editing tools
to speciﬁcally target mtDNA. Mito-TALENs can be used to cut

mutated mtDNA, and have already been used to selectively
eliminate defective mtDNA in both unfertilized mouse eggs
and murine zygotes. Furthermore, these genetically modiﬁed
mice gave birth to two successive generations of healthy mice.
When mRNA encoding mito-TALENs was injected into an egg
from a heteroplasmic mouse that carried two mtDNA haplotypes (NZB and BALB), mtDNA heteroplasmy shift was
achieved and the edited embryos grew into normal mice.
Importantly, the authors did not observe any off-target effects
(251).
Up to this point, we have recounted the massive potential
offered by this new CRISPR-Cas9 technology tool, in both
research and future clinical applications, particularly in the
ﬁeld of germline genetic modiﬁcation, such as treating mitochondrial diseases. This is enough motivation to be interested

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
233
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
in the curative potential of CRISPR-Cas9 technologies for carriers of both heteroplasmic and homoplasmic mtDNA mutations. Although gene-editing may not affect all mutant
mtDNA, it may modify enough to bring the individual below
the disease threshold, conferring therapeutic beneﬁts.
Although there is considerable hesitation among the scientiﬁc
community to use this technique in the germline, as
mentioned before, studies using nonviable human embryos
have already been performed (256–259), showing that the
technique works with low efﬁciency to generate on-target
gene modiﬁcation, but that off-target mutations are also
generated and the resulting embryos are mosaic, with the
exception of one recent study (259). CRISPR-Cas9 has already
been successfully used to produce mitochondrial sequencespeciﬁc cleavage, as proof of the concept that this technique
can target speciﬁc mitochondrial genes (251). In the same
study, researchers engineered a new version of the enzyme
Cas9, mitoCas9, whose localization is restricted to the mitochondrial matrix. This is an important step, because it reduces
the risk of off-target mutations in the embryo and prospective
children.
CRISPR-Cas9 editing of embryonic mtDNA may represent
a more socially acceptable alternative to ‘‘three-parent IVF.’’
Instead of combining the genetics of three individuals, this
technique may enable a couple to conceive without requiring
donor genetic material. Another advantage of trying to treat
mitochondrial disease before implantation is the small number of cells; it may be easier to ensure a reduced mutation load
if the embryo is in the 8- or 16-cell stage, rather than waiting
to provide a therapeutic intervention after birth, when there
are exponentially more cells.

Considering how far the ﬁeld has advanced in just the 5
years since the introduction of CRISPR-Cas9 systems in early
2013, and with the approval of the ﬁrst two in vivo clinical
trials dealing with cancer immunotherapy on T cells (USA)
and lung cancer (China), we can undoubtedly expect remarkable progress in the next 5 years in the basic research and
reproductive ﬁelds.

HUMAN EMBRYONIC STEM CELLS:
THE DISCOVERY OF PLURIPOTENCY
Alan Trounson, Ph.D.
The ability of a cultured cell to develop into any cell of the organism, known as pluripotency, was discovered in embryonal
carcinoma cells (ECCs) by Kleinsmith and Pierce (261). Pluripotent stem cells derived from the preimplantation mouse embryo were developed and used to establish transgenic
offspring and explore functional genomics. Concurrently, developments in human IVF were evolving that provided access
to human embryos from fertilization to the blastocyst stage
in vitro (262) and an interest to explore the origins of embryonic tissue formation and integration. This led to the research
of two separate and independent groups to develop pluripotent human embryonic stem cells (ESCs). One group (263)
had being studying monkey embryonic stem cells and the
other (264) had been examining the development of isolated
inner cell mass (ICM) cells of blastocyst-stage human embryos (265, 266).

CONCLUSION

PREIMPLANTATION EMBRYOS AND
PLURIPOTENCY

In recent years, the development of new technologies based
on sequence-speciﬁc nucleases has enhanced the feasibility
of constructing donor vectors, genome editing with the use
of oligonucleotides, multiplexed genome editing, greatly
improved efﬁciency in targeting speciﬁc genomic loci, direct
genome editing by means of the electroporation of embryos,
and, the most important achievement, avoiding mosaicism
in human embryos. This technologic breakthrough makes
the possibility of editing the human germline much more
feasible than in the past. From our point of view, basic studies
must be conducted in nonhuman animal models to better understand the target disease before these technologies can successfully be used to edit DNA. Because nonhuman studies
have limitations in predicting outcomes in humans, subsequent research in humans will be necessary. Similarly, before
CRISPR-Cas9 technology can be translated to the clinic,
outstanding problems must be resolved, primarily mosaicism
and off-target effects, although apparently it seems to have
been solved in the Mitalipov group’s study. Nevertheless,
once technical issues are resolved, editing of the human germline to prevent the birth of a child with a genetic defect should
be considered only when already established methods, which
do not entail manipulation of the genome (such as PGD), are
not available.

Teratocarcinomas are germ cell tumors most commonly
found in the testes and contain cells of all three primary
germ cell lineages in a chaotic unorganized state as well as,
importantly, undifferentiated malignant cells that are pluripotent (267). These pluripotent cells are ECCs and were used for
the founding observations on pluripotency and differentiation into various cell lineages of interest. Importantly they
also provided critical data on oncogenesis. However, their
malignant properties prevented any consideration of direct
clinical applications. Teratomas are nonmalignant and generally arise in the ovary, probably as parthenogenetically activated oocytes. These cells attracted further attention as
pluripotent stem cells, particularly in the mouse, where the
ECCs could easily be derived in some strains from fetal
germ cells, maintained in culture, and differentiated when
transplanted in vivo. This in turn led to the development of
mouse ESCs from preimplantation embryos with research primarily concentrated on their use for functional genomics with
the use of gene knockout techniques and chimeric animals
produced by blastocyst injection of gene-edited ESCs. Interest
in using human ECCs derived from human fetal germ cells
was reported around the time of the discoveries of human
ESCs by Ghearhart et al. (268). However, although these human ECCs are pluripotent, they are more difﬁcult to maintain

234
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
in culture and to differentiate into a wide range of mature cell
types than human ESCs.

DISCOVERING ESCS AND PLURIPOTENCY
WITH THE USE OF IVF BLASTOCYSTS
DONATED FOR RESEARCH
Given the success of mouse ESCs in determining gene function by gene knockout and chimeric mouse development in
studies of functional genomics and the capacity to generate
monkey ESCs, it was of interest for the understanding of early
human development and early childhood cancers to try to
produce human ESCs. Early studies showed that blastocysts
would plate out in culture (265), but these cultures did not
resemble the mouse ESC colonies formed with the use of
mouse embryos. Further studies in 1995–1996 using the
mouse ESC derivation methods on mouse ﬁbroblast cell
feeder layer cultures showed typical ‘‘lumpy’’ colonies that
were different from mouse ESC colonies, but could be
passaged on mouse feeder layers. Although mouse ESC researchers doubted that these were ESCs, scientists experienced in pluripotent ECCs culture believed that they were
indeed human ESCs. With this in mind, the collaboration between Monash University and National University of
Singapore scientists was reinitiated in 1997 and six ESC lines
were established from 30 human embryos. These cells expressed all the pluripotent markers of ECCs and could be
passaged indeﬁnitely on mouse feeder cells. By chance, the
Monash group received the Wisconsin group’s paper (263)
to review for the journal Science in 1998 and knew that their
report of successful human ESC derivation was correct. At this
time the full characterization by teratoma formation and analyses of multiple lineage on the Monash-Singapore cells had
not been completed. It was decided to demonstrate directed
neural lineage differentiation as further proof of pluripotency
before publishing the Monash data (264) conﬁrming the Wisconsin report of discovery of human ESCs.
The human ESCs formed from human blastocysts are not
exactly equivalent to mouse ESCs; they appear to more
resemble mouse ESCs derived from the advanced gastrula
stage, termed mouse epiblast stem cells. Human ESCs can
be converted to the more naïve ground state by deﬁned culture conditions that enable the human ESCs to express molecular markers and functional characteristics that are similar to
mouse ESCs (269). Whether this naïve ground state of human
ESCs is essential for deriving speciﬁc tissues for transplantation has not really been decided yet. However, methods that
work well for directing differentiation of mouse ESCs are
likely to be shared by these naïve human ESCs.

DERIVING AND DIFFERENTIATING ESCS
Human blastocysts have been grown in vitro from the earliest
days of human IVF research (270). Interest in using spare
human blastocysts for deriving ESCs followed the routine
production of blastocysts for clinical use (271). The demonstration of the properties of immortality in continuous culture
in vitro and ability of these cultured cells to form the major
lineages of human development and potentially every cell

type of the human body deﬁned their pluripotentiality. Essentially, the original method for deriving ESCs requires the
immune-isolation of the ICM of human blastocysts and culture of these ICMs under deﬁned conditions on mouse ﬁbroblast feeder cells. By regular passage of the dissected colonies
before they exhibit spontaneous differentiation, the ESCs
develop as colonies attached to plastic culture dishes in the
presence of mouse feeder cells (Fig. 13). This method is efﬁcient in producing ESC lines. Variations on this basic method
are now in use, including the replacement of the animal feeder
cells (feeder-free derivation) and use of earlier-stage human
embryos and biopsied cells (272). Up to 2009, it was reported
that 1,071 human ESC lines were derived by 87 institutions
around the world, but >70% of the publications on ESCs at
this time involved just two of those cell lines (266). Therefore,
predictions that massive numbers of human embryos would
be used to derive ESCs has not been realized. Indeed, there
are large numbers of cryopreserved human embryos that
remain in storage in the U.S. and elsewhere that could be
used for producing ESCs or for other compelling research
studies (273).
The expression of key transcription factors is characteristic of pluripotent ESCs. Indeed, expression of just four primary transcription factors (OCT4, cMYC, KLF4, and SOX2)
is sufﬁcient to convert mature somatic cells into induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Some of the SOX family of
transcription factors are highly expressed in undifferentiated
pluripotent stem cells and others are up-regulated in decisions
during differentiation into speciﬁc lineages (274). Pluripotent
stem cells express common speciﬁc cell surface antigens,
including SSEA-3, SSEA-4, tumor-related antigen (TRA) 160, TRA-1-81, and NANOG. They have high telomerase activity which enables their continuous multiplication in vitro.
When ESCs begin to differentiate, single-cell RNA sequencing
shows that cells make speciﬁc lineage decisions that result in
dual or multiple populations developing as different cell
types. Therefore, it is important to select the correct cluster
from the differentiating populations for those with potential
to form efﬁciently the cell type desired for preclinical studies
and applications in cell therapies.

THE POTENTIAL FOR DISCOVERY WITH THE
USE OF ESCS
Human ESCs are now in clinical trials for numerous conditions including spinal cord repair, macular degeneration,
type 1 diabetes, myocardial infarct, and Parkinson disease
(275). Progress is slowly showing clinical beneﬁts with the
use of ESC therapies in many of these applications. The relatively long process has much to do with the emerging cell
therapy technologies which have complex regulatory requirements to get to the clinic. Time is needed to judge whether
these therapies will eventually become part of clinical practice
for regenerative medicine.
Interest in using pluripotent stem cells for immunotherapy has grown with the success of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell technology for blood cancer therapy. Work is
underway to manufacture T cells and natural killer cells from
pluripotent stem cells genetically engineered with CARs that

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
235
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 13

The isolated inner cell mass (ICM) of human blastocysts can be used to form embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Numerous applications are under study,
including cell therapies, drug discovery, blastocyst complementation by introducing gene edited human pluripotent stem cells into animal
blastocysts, immunotherapy targeting cancer with T cells derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), synthetic embryos, and gonads
and artiﬁcial gametes derived from iPSCs. (ESC colony photo provided by A. Trounson and A. Michalska.)
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

can be multiplied and strongly target and destroy tumor cells.
The ability to gene-edit pluripotent stem cells, select for the
desired integration, and expand them in vitro provides a
very attractive opportunity for cancer therapies.
The discovery of how to derive iPSCs was dependent on
data of transcription factor expression in ESCs. These iPSCs
are also making their way into similar therapeutic applications as ESCs (275) (Fig 13). Perhaps some of the most important developments may come from the use of pluripotent stem
cells, together with human genomics, in drug discovery (276).
Pluripotent stem cells may also be used in blastocyst complementation to form chimeric animals that could produce human organs for possible transplantation (277). More recent
publications of growing embryos to postimplantation stages
has led to consideration and early studies on the development
of synthetic embryos with the use of pluripotent stem cells
that are not developmentally competent (278) but provide a
model for many developmental abnormalities, drug
screening, lineage formation and organization, and functional genomics (Fig. 13).
Primitive pluripotent stem cells can be directed into the
germ cell lineage. In the mouse, it has been shown that both
sperm and oocytes with full developmental competence can
be derived from ESCs and iPSCs, although the oocytes require
fetal ovarian somatic cells to accomplish the critical conversion to primordial-like germ cells. The development of human
germ cells and gametes is also underway, and it is very likely
in the near future that human iPSCs could be used to produce

sperm from sterile men and possibly repopulate artiﬁcial
ovaries for sterile women. Clearly these developments will
be desired by many individuals who are sterile because they
do not have gametes. The social issues raised for using pluripotent cells for enabling reproduction in transgender individuals will test the support of community ethics. There will
also be debate concerning the use of iPSC-derived gametes
and artiﬁcial gonads for use by postmenopausal women
and older men to extend their reproductive life spans. These
discussions ought to begin as science moves these new discoveries toward potential application, and key scientiﬁc societies should have a strong voice in enabling the community to
understand the potential beneﬁts and risks of these possible
new medical developments.

REFLECTIONS ON THE DISCOVERY OF ESCS
The transition from human embryology to pluripotential
stem cells was driven by the curiosity of cell biologist members of the research groups described. The availability of human IVF blastocysts enabled the discoveries to occur. My
own motivations were to better understand the incredible
transformation processes of differentiation that turned
primitive embryonic cells into the primary germ lineages
for tissue formation and the possible use of resulting cell
products in medical therapeutics. I was enthralled with the
experiments, and I also thought that we may better understand the origins of childhood cancers and birth defects.

236
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
Following the signposts from basic scientiﬁc developments
in other species provided the necessary information to
make the leap to discoveries of human pluripotency that

may possibly change the nature of therapies for regenerative medicine, and even cancer, for evermore. This seems
likely.

PATIENT SELECTION
THE ENDOMETRIAL FACTOR
Carlos Simon, M.D., Ph.D.
WHERE ARE WE TODAY?
Human reproduction is a very inefﬁcient process compared
that of the majority of mammalian species. The probability
of conception during a given menstrual cycle is 30% (279)
versus 95% in rodents and 96% in rabbits. In humans, only
60% of all conceptions advance beyond 20 weeks of gestation, and 75% of lost pregnancies fail to implant and are
not clinically recognized (280).
Between the ﬁrst live birth from a human embryo generated with the use of in vitro fertilization (IVF) in 1978 and
Robert Edwards’ Nobel prize award in 2010, reproductive
medicine has emerged as one of the most rapidly developing
areas of medical science. This achievement has been possible
by integrating the knowledge developed in endocrinology,
embryology, reproductive science laboratories, and endoscopy, and coupling it with the creation and availability of
novel compounds for ovarian stimulation. Additional technologies extending the scope and efﬁciency of IVF have subsequently been developed and implemented. These include
intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), preimplantation genetic diagnosis, and cryotechnology, which allows the
freezing and storage of sperm, oocytes, embryos, and testicular and ovarian tissue. Despite all these technologic advances, when a morphologically normal blastocyst is
transferred into a seemingly normal uterus in IVF, cycle
reproductive success is very limited (281) and has not significantly improved since the 1990s.
Ovarian function, induction of ovulation, and studies of
oocyte and embryo have been by far the preferred areas of
investigation by researchers and clinicians. The ﬁnal success
of a crucial function such as embryo implantation relies on
two partners, the embryo and the endometrium; we can no
longer avert our eyes from one of them, namely, the endometrial factor. The human uterus, and mainly the endometrium,
are the anatomic and functional prerequisites for continuing
the species. Pregnancy begins with embryonic implantation.
Women menstruate in an endless resetting process to synchronize the uterus for the imminent arrival of a blastocyst.
Progesterone (P) is the single most important hormone controlling the initiation and course of pregnancy in humans,
and P withdrawal is the ‘‘trigger’’ for menstruation in
nonpregnant cycles. P induces the acquisition of a 12–48hour transient functional state by the endometrial epithelium
known as the window of receptivity or window of implantation (WOI). This limited period can be found in a personalized

manner from LHþ6 to LHþ9 in a natural cycle or from Pþ4 to
Pþ7 in a hormonal replacement therapy cycle.
During this WOI, the endometrial epithelium undergoes a
morphologic transition to the receptive phenotype regulated
by a speciﬁc transcriptional program. As a result, modiﬁcations in the plasma membrane occur leading to the disruption
of the cytoskeleton and preparing the apical pole for cell-tocell adhesion known as plasma membrane transformation
(282). It allows blastocyst adhesion that is characterized by
increased physical interaction between the blastocyst and
the uterine epithelium. Shortly thereafter, the WOI closes.
The decidualization process is initiated around uterine spiral
arterioles, involving the morphologic and biochemical reprogramming of the endometrial stromal compartment. The
formation of the decidua is a conceptus-independent progressive process that is driven by P (283), which increases local cyclic adenosine monophosphate production that stimulates
synthesis of a complex network of intracellular and secreted
proteins. Morphologically, decidualization is characterized
by the transformation of elongated ﬁbroblast-like stromal
cells into enlarged polygonal/round cells shaped by a complex intracellular cytoskeleton rearrangement. The postimplantation blastocyst is quickly embedded in the stromal
tissue previously decidualized by P, which controls trophoblast invasion and subsequent placentation. Finally, the uterine epithelium regrows to cover the implantation site.
The main difference between humans and nonmenstruating species such as rodents and rabbits lies in decidual control
of human implantation versus embryo control of rodent implantation. This preponderance of the embryo directing implantation is exempliﬁed by the process known as
embryonic diapause or delayed implantation, which is not
present in humans. Embryonic diapause occurs in more
than 130 species of mammals, ranging from bears and badgers to mice and marsupials. Implantation is withheld as the
embryo is suspended in the blastocyst stage for up to 1 year
in some cases, and subsequently resumes without deleterious
effects for the pregnancy. However, in the human it is the
uterus and its endometrial mucosa that are the anatomic
and functional prerequisite for continuing the species. They
are also an important limiting factor for improving the efﬁciency of human reproduction.

LANDMARK ACHIEVEMENTS TOWARD
UNDERSTANDING THE ENDOMETRIAL FACTOR:
HOW DID WE GET HERE?
Perhaps the reader knows the most cited paper in obstetrics
and gynecology? Published in the inaugural issue of Fertility
and Sterility in 1950, Noyes et al. described the histologic

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
237
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
evaluation of the human endometrium, providing for the ﬁrst
time an objective classiﬁcation for endometrial dating (284).
This landmark paper, cited 2,606 times, initiated the era of
anatomic medicine for the endometrial factor. Fifty years
later, the accuracy, reproducibility, and functional relevance
of histologic evaluation as a predictor of endometrial receptivity or even fertility was questioned in randomized studies
(285). Though Noyes’ discovery of the morphologic evidence
of endometrial transformation through the menstrual cycle
was seminal in the history of our understanding of endometrial functionality, it was not sufﬁciently speciﬁc or precise,
owing to the technologies used at that time, for prediction
of implantation and is not currently a useful diagnostic test
of endometrial reproductive function. Consequently, endometrial histology is not included in today’s standard clinical
infertility work-up, although it remains relevant for diagnosis
of malignancy or endometritis.
The concepts of endometrial receptivity and the existence
of a WOI were ﬁrst suggested by Hertig and Rock in 1956
(286). In their pioneering study lasting 17 years, the authors
recovered 84 pre- and postimplantation embryos (known at
that time as fertilized human ova) from 210 patients of known
fertility (1–14 children) with coital dates around the estimated
time of ovulation who underwent hysterectomy during the
next 2 weeks. A total of 34 embryos ranging from 2-cell
cleavage stage to a 17-day implanting blastocyst (named as
villous ovum implanted in early decidua) were found. The
take-home message from this magniﬁcent work was that
30% of the embryos (13/34) were ‘‘abnormal’’ and that embryonic implantation occurs around day 20 in a regular menstrual cycle, demonstrating for the ﬁrst time the concept of the
WOI.
In the 1980s, two critically important technical advances
in medical imaging were developed: hysteroscopy and transvaginal ultrasound. The modiﬁcation of the resectoscope
from transurethral prostate resections to hysteroscopic procedures facilitated diagnosis and operation within the uterine
cavity under direct visualization. Since then, signiﬁcant improvements have evolved with rigid complicated instruments
evolving into outpatient hysteroscopy as the best diagnostic
and therapeutic technique for uterine pathology, though not
for predicting endometrial receptivity. In 1986, the introduction of transvaginal ultrasound for aspirating oocytes (287)
popularized this technique for the direct visualization of the
endometrium and endometrial cavity before, during, and after
controlled ovarian stimulation as well as later on for placing
the embryo in the correct position in the endometrial cavity.
Owing to its resolution, low cost, lack of exposure to ionizing
radiation, and technical improvement for three-dimensional
imaging, it is today the only diagnostic examination required
for evaluation of the endometrial factor. Nevertheless, it is not
sufﬁcient for predicting endometrial molecular normalcy and
implantation potential.
In the 1990s, with the use of the ovum donation model,
clinical WOI, which refers to the time frame in which the embryo must be transferred to the uterus, was demonstrated
(288). Endometrial receptivity was tested by replacing 2- to
12-cell embryos (days 2–4 of embryo development) between
days 16 and 24 of hormonally and histologically deﬁned

cycles. Of 37 embryo transfer procedures in cycle days 17–
19, 15 conceptions occurred (40.5%), whereas of 11 patients
transferred on days 20–24, none conceived. Similarly, no
pregnancies were achieved with four transfers on cycle
day 16.
Further work by Wilcox et al. in 1999 (289) popularized
the concept that the human embryo implants 8–10 days after
ovulation in natural conceptions. However, ovulation was
identiﬁed on the basis of changes in urinary excretion of E2
and P metabolites, measured by means of radioimmunoassay.
Now, almost 20 years later, the above method to determine
ovulation has not been adopted. The time frame difference between that early urinary metabolite test and today’s peak LH
blood test used to predict ovulation is unknown. Actual estimates in assisted reproductive technology cycles indicate that
the WOI is centered at 5 days after endogenous or exogenous
P administration; in a natural cycle it occurs 6–7 days after
ovulation (centered at day 20 of the menstrual cycle, ranging
from days 19 to 22). Nevertheless, the clinical community has
since embraced a permissive time frame in all patients with
the same success of implantation for 3 days regardless of individual variations or hormonal treatment received (i.e., natural cycles, controlled ovarian stimulation, hormonal
replacement cycles). These are the historical reasons why embryo transfer is usually performed when the embryo is ready,
assuming the mother’s endometrium is synchronized with the
embryo, although it has been demonstrated that this synchrony cannot be assumed.
Also in the 1990s, Barker presented his theory suggesting
that ‘‘the womb may be more important than the home’’ to
emphasize the concept that the maternal endometrium may
have a profound effect on adult physiology by conditioning
the embryo, the fetus, and its adult life. Barker postulated
that the metabolic effects of depriving a fetus of an adequate
supply of nutrients would result in irrevocable ‘‘programming,’’ predisposing it to an increased risk for disease in
adulthood (290). This groundbreaking concept has been
conﬁrmed in a variety of nonhuman animal models and by
large clinical studies of complex diseases such as obesity,
type 2 diabetes, hypertension, stroke, and atherosclerosis.
More recently, the concept has expanded to include the transcriptomic reprogramming of the preimplantation embryo by
the maternal intrauterine environment. Even transgenerational effects have been demonstrated with the observation
that the intrauterine environment affects the fertility of the
offspring by modulating fetal gametogenesis in utero, thereby
expanding even further the Barker hypothesis that ‘‘the womb
of your grandmother may be more important than your
home.’’ Because epigenetic changes contribute to the pathogenesis of several complex diseases, it is of crucial importance
to identify and modify intrauterine changes that may mediate
programming of the developing embryo that will impact
adulthood.
The transition from anatomic to molecular medicine in
the diagnosis of the endometrial function arrived only two decades ago. Initially, it was unsuccessfully investigated at the
single molecular and biochemical levels. All possible molecules and receptors with expression concordant with the
WOI time frame were scrutinized without consistent clinical

238
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
translational results. However, the search for a transcriptomic
signature of endometrial receptivity was a major turning
point in the understanding of this function. Pioneering
work from the group of Peter Rogers (291), Linda Giudice
(292), and Carlos Simon (293) demonstrates the feasibility
of the molecular classiﬁcation of the endometrium with the
use of transcriptomic proﬁling throughout the menstrual cycle, as well as during the window of receptivity/WOI. On this
basis, considering that precision medicine is focused on targeted individualized treatment, in 2011 we reported the transcriptomic signature of human endometrial receptivity from
238 genes, leading to the creation of endometrial receptivity
analysis (294). This molecular analysis is now performed
with the use of next-generation sequencing coupled with a
computational predictor and algorithm able to identify the
personalized WOI of a given patient regardless of the histologic appearance of their endometrium. We now have the
tools to improve synchrony between the embryo and the
endometrium: When both are ready, implantation is more
successful.
Finally, following thorough work in various nonhuman
animal models, uterine transplantation is now a reality since
the Brannstr€
om group published the ﬁrst successful live birth
after uterine transplantation (295). This latest milestone in
reproductive medicine leads to novel therapeutic solutions
for the treatment of absolute uterine factor infertility (Fig. 14).

WHAT WILL THE NEXT 40 YEARS BRING?
Prophets are typically wrong, and I will be no exception, but
several unmet needs remain in endometrial biology research
that are getting closer to clinical translation. The technologic
innovations are coming from three disruptive ﬁelds: genetics,
stem cell research/bioengineering, and nanotechnology. My
forecast is that improvements in the endometrial factor will
be application driven with the use of state-of-the-art techniques, rather than technology driven.

KISMI: keep it simple and minimally invasive?
The search for biomarkers in biologic ﬂuids has emerged as an
efﬁcient alternative to classic invasive diagnostic methods.
Human endometrial glands actively secrete endometrial
ﬂuid (EF), whose main functions are immunologic
defense and nursing-reprogramming preimplantation embryos throughout the apposition, adhesion, and early invasion processes. EF can also be aspirated in the same cycle
that embryo transfer is performed without affecting pregnancy rates. The secretomic study of EF initiated by Nick
Macklon’s group may open up a new ﬁeld for the noninvasive
diagnosis of endometrial function.

Looking for the complete picture:
the endometrial microbiome
The recent advent of cost-effective and scalable nextgeneration sequencing, together with the knowledge of bacterial genomes, has facilitated the discovery of unique microbiomes in anatomic niches previously considered to be
sterile (e.g., the uterus). The endometrial cavity has been clas-

sically considered to be a sterile site, but recent reports challenging this dogma support the existence of an endometrial
microbiome composed of different microorganisms (specifically Lactobacillus spp., Mycoplasma hominis, Gardnerella
vaginalis, and Enterobacter spp.) that differs from that of
the vagina (296). The study of the endometrial microbiome
in IVF patients has revealed that bacterial communities may
have an impact in reproductive success; speciﬁcally, the presence of dysbiotic or pathogenic bacteria populations has been
proposed as an emerging cause of repeated implantation failure or recurrent miscarriage. This fascinating area could lead
to ‘‘probiotic’’ treatment to correct an abnormal endometrial
microbiome and improve reproductive outcome.

Treat with cells what cannot be cured with drugs
Regenerative medicine is a new scientiﬁc ﬁeld aiming to
replace or regenerate human cells, tissues, or organs to restore
normal function. Endometrial cell therapy intending to
achieve de novo endometrial regeneration in patients with
Asherman syndrome and atrophic endometrium by means
of autologous cell therapy with CD133þ bone marrow–
derived stem cells is attracting the attention of the clinical
community (297). The European Medicine Agency has issued
a positive opinion to consider CD133þ cells as the ﬁrst
Orphan Drug Designed therapy for the treatment of Asherman
syndrome, categorizing these cells as an Advanced Therapy
Medicinal Product, and supervised phase I/II and III trials
are underway.
The transplantation of the uterus is inherently limited by
familiar problems, including the lack of donor organs and the
need for long-term immunosuppression after transplantation.
Since 2008, several milestones in uterine bioengineering have
been achieved related to the growth of cells on speciﬁc threedimensional structures with the use of different supports or
scaffolds: decellularization preserving a reusable/functional
extracellular uterine matrix while maintaining its vascular
network, and partial recellularization with cells from putative
recipients. Thus, the creation of the bioengineered artiﬁcial
uterus with the use of autologous cells from putative recipients is a natural progression of this ﬁeld.

The uterine factor behind gestational pathologies
The maternal decidua controls conception and the course of
pregnancy in humans. Failed decidualization or resistance
to decidualization is associated with a spectrum of reproductive defects, including failed implantation and clinical
miscarriage, but also late gestational complications, such as
preeclampsia (298). New emerging data reinforce the concept
that a suboptimal uterine environment lies upstream of not
only inefﬁcient conception, but also failed trophoblast differentiation and invasion driving placentation, paving the way
to better diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of late gestational diseases.
Thus, we are at a turning point in the history of the
forgotten maternal endometrium to improve the success
and safety of assisted reproductive technologies for the
beneﬁt of our patients. We have the opportunity to build on

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
239
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 14

2020
Uterus Transplantaon
Brännström et al., 2015

Endometrial Receptivity Analysis (ERA)
Daz-Gimeno et al., 2011

2010

2000

Embryo-Endometrial Synchrony
Wilcox et al., 1999
The womb may be more important than the home
Barker et al., 1990

Clinical WOI Ovum Donation
Navot et al., 1991
Transvaginal Ultrasound
Kemeter et al., 1986

1990

Hysteroscopy

1980

1970

1960
Window of Implantaon (WOI)
Herg et al., 1956

1950
Landmarks in the understanding of the endometrial factor.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

the understanding of the morphologic changes described by
Noyes 67 years ago. Going forward we should add the ‘‘soil’’
concept to our clinical practice, combining anatomic
medicine with the modern understanding of the genetic
and molecular underpinnings of endometrial function to
provide accurate diagnostic and therapeutic modalities
maximizing the endometrial factor and its critical function
in embryonic implantation. Furthermore, understanding
the endometrium, the uterine environment, and its contribution to both the successful outcome of a pregnancy and the
long-term health of future generations is crucial to maximizing the ultimate success of our treatment for infertile
patients and their families.
Acknowledgments: The author gratefully acknowledges Cecilia Valdes and Alan Thornhill for their critical review of this
manuscript.

TREATMENT EVOLUTION
OF HYDROSALPINX IN
INFERTILE WOMEN
Togas Tulandi, M.D., M.H.C.M.

Since my residency years, I have been fascinated with the
function and disorders affecting the fallopian tube and their
association with infertility. During fellowship, I became
passionate about reconstructive surgery to restore fertility.
We used the principles of microsurgery, including gentle tissue handling, the use of ﬁne instruments, and ﬁne and nonreactive suture materials. The purpose is to restore the tubal
function, enhancing the chance to conceive.
One of the newest energies then was the carbon dioxide
(CO2) laser. It was thought that the use of CO2 laser was precise, associated with minimal tissue damage, and rapid tissue
healing with no adhesion formation, characteristics that
would be beneﬁcial for surgery enhancing fertility. Accordingly, we performed a study comparing surgical treatment
of hydrosalpinx with the use of laser versus electrosurgery
(Fig. 15). We found that the pregnancy rates after terminal
salpingostomy with the two surgical modalities were similar
(299). Similar results were found with postoperative adhesion
formation and salpingo-ovariolysis in infertile women.
Reproductive outcome of reconstructive surgery for hydrosalpinx is generally unsatisfactory. Depending on the
severity of the hydrosalpinx, the rate of pregnancy can be
very low if the tube is rigid and thick without mucosal folds,
and up to 50% when the tubal damage is minimal. In a randomized study, the rates of spontaneous pregnancy and

240
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 15

FIGURE 16

Dilated fallopian tube consistent with hydrosalpinx. No spillage of
methylene blue dye on chromopertubation.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

To mitigate the interference of ovarian blood supply, salpingectomy
should be performed very close to the tube.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

ectopic pregnancy 24 months after salpingostomy by
means of laparotomy were 43.7% and 5.0%, respectively,
and after laparoscopic salpingostomy were 41.6% and 3.9%,
respectively (300, 301).
To evaluate the degree of tubal damage, we used the classiﬁcation of distal tubal disease of the American Fertility Society (now the American Society for Reproductive Medicine).
It is based on the condition of mucosal folds, tubal thickness,
and the extent and nature of periadnexal adhesions. Another
method to assess the degree of tubal damage is by performing
a transvaginal falloposcopy or salpingoscopy at the time of
laparoscopy. As such, the endosalpinx can be examined by
means of falloposcopy or salpingoscopy and the external
tube as well as the distal endosalpinx by means of laparoscopy. It was thought that evaluation of the internal fallopian
tube led to a better evaluation of the hydrosalpinx. However,
those procedures did not gain popularity and were soon abandoned. The main reason was an improved live birth rate with
in vitro fertilization (IVF), making tubal surgery less popular.
Furthermore, the recurrence rate of hydrosalpinx after surgery is high.
Indeed, compared with tuboplasty, IVF has become a better treatment option for women with hydrosalpinx. In addition, it eliminates the need for surgery and general
anesthesia, and conception can occur much faster than after
surgery. As a result, tuboplasty for hydrosalpinx is recommended only for young women with good and preserved
tube and no other infertility factors.
However, the presence of hydrosalpinx in women undergoing IVF treatment is associated with reduced pregnancy
rates (302). This could be due to entry of the hydrosalpinx
ﬂuid into the uterine cavity ﬂushing out the embryo, toxic effects of the hydrosalpinx ﬂuid to the gamete or embryo, or
alteration in endometrial receptivity. A few randomized
studies showed that hydrosalpinx removal (salpingectomy)
increased the efﬁcacy of IVF outcomes (302–304). The
beneﬁts seem to be higher when the hydrosalpinx is
bilateral and visible on ultrasound. In a meta-analysis

involving 646 women, pre-IVF treatment with salpingectomy
was associated with a higher ongoing pregnancy rate than in
those not pretreated (31% vs. 17.6%, odds ratio [OR]: 2.20,
95% conﬁdence interval [CI]: 1.26–3.82) (305).
Yet salpingectomy could also affect the ovarian blood
ﬂow and reduces ovarian response during subsequent IVF
cycles (306). As a result, salpingectomy before IVF treatment
should be performed close to the tube to avoid compromising the blood supply to the ovary (307) (Fig. 16). Thermal
energy should be used sparingly. Occasionally, hydrosalpinx
is buried in dense adhesions limiting access to the distal
tube. Here, one can occlude the proximal part of the tube
either by means of electrocautery or preferably with the
use of clips, similarly to sterilization. The efﬁcacy seems to
be similar to that of salpingectomy (308). However, the resulting iatrogenic tubal occlusion (proximal and distal
occlusion) could be followed by further distension of the
hydrosalpinx. A meta-analysis shows that the on-going
IVF pregnancy rates of proximal tubal occlusion (relative
risk [RR]: 3.22, 95% CI: 1.27–8.14) and salpingectomy (RR:
2.24, 95% CI: 1.27–3.95) were superior to no surgical intervention (309).
A less invasive technique is to place a microinsert into the
proximal tube by hysteroscope. One such device is Essure
(Conceptus, Scottsdale, Arizona), which is approved by the
Food and Drug Administration for tubal sterilization. The device and the resulting ﬁbrosis of the tubal lumen occlude the
tube. In a two-center randomized study, the ongoing IVF
pregnancy rate per patient after hysteroscopic proximal occlusion (26.2%, 95% CI: 7.1%–49.1%; RR: 0.47, 95% CI:
0.27–0.83) was lower than after laparoscopic salpingectomy
(55.8%) (310).
A systematic review of 115 women pretreated with Essure placement before IVF showed a 38.6% pregnancy rate
(95% CI: 30.9%–46.8%) and 27.9% live birth rate (95% CI:
21.1%–35.8%) (311). However, in the past years, there

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
241
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
have been an increasing number of cases of abdominal pain
possibly related to the device and requiring its removal
(312). This could be due to nickel allergy or to an enlargement of the hydrosalpinx. Subsequently, the system was
withdrawn from the market in some European countries
and in Canada. The use of Essure before IVF treatment is
off-label.
A minimally invasive procedure before IVF that does not
require surgery and could be performed as an ofﬁce procedure
is hydrosalpinx sclerotherapy under ultrasound guidance. The
most commonly used sclerosing agent is 98% alcohol, which
is injected into the dilated tube at about one-half of the volume of the aspirated hydrosalpinx ﬂuid. In a meta-analysis,
we recently reported no difference in the clinical pregnancy
rates between hydrosalpinx sclerotherapy and salpingectomy
(OR: 0.79, 95% CI: 0.54–1.17) (313).
The treatment of hydrosalpinx has certainly evolved from
reconstructive surgery to its removal before IVF treatment.
The development in sclerotherapy may make the procedure
much less invasive with similar IVF outcome. Whether sclerotherapy can replace other minimally invasive surgeries to
enhance the IVF outcome remains to be seen in randomized
trials with sufﬁcient statistical power.

ENVIRONMENT AND INFERTILITY:
ITS ROLE IN ASSISTED
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES

working on different parts of the reproductive and infertility
paradigm and seeing relevance and research through different
lenses. Considerations about the role of ‘‘the environment’’
contributing to reproductive compromise gradually extended
to studies on outcomes of clinical therapies for human infertility. The nexus of these approaches over time was almost
inevitable given the importance of steroid hormones in reproduction, EDCs in the environment, and processes involved in
gametogenesis, embryogenesis, implantation, and placentation. However, the importance of the environment in the
ART laboratory was recognized early on, as laboratory air
quality and culture media were noted to have profound effects
on gamete function, embryo development, and clinical IVF
outcomes. The present monograph reviews some of the history of reproductive environmental health research in humans and ﬁndings that correlate with or could predispose to
infertility in men and women, some of the mechanisms underlying reproductive ‘‘disruption,’’ challenges in conducting
such research, and relatively recent information about environmental chemicals and air pollution on IVF clinical outcomes. Highlighted throughout the results of scientiﬁc
inquiry are roles of professional medical and research societies, the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Environmental Program (UNEP), public health policy,
concerned citizens, and patient groups in advocating for scientiﬁc discovery and raising awareness and disseminating
evidence-based information about environmental impacts
on human fertility and during fertility treatment—all to protect human reproductive health now and in the future.

Linda C. Giudice, M.D., Ph.D.
In 1962, Rachel Carson, a writer, marine biologist, and ecologist, published her landmark book Silent Spring (314). This
scholarly work put the spotlight on the causal relationship
between man-made pesticides and wildlife abnormalities
and lethality. Furthermore, it underscored environmental inﬂuences, broadly, on health and disease and the need for public awareness and public policy to prevent harm. In the 1990s,
Theodora Colborn, Ph.D., a research scientist and environmentalist, coined the term ‘‘endocrine disrupters’’ and presented data supporting the conclusion that exposures in
utero, postnatally, and across the lifespan to environmental
‘‘endocrine’’ toxicants disrupt developmental, behavioral,
sexual, and reproductive processes (315). Endocrinedisrupting chemicals (EDCs) are now deﬁned as chemicals
or mixtures that interfere with any aspect of hormone action
at any time of development and/or during the life course (316)
and comprise the most widely studied class of environmental
toxicants relevant to human health and reproduction.
These seminal scientiﬁc works triggered intense investigations by mainly laboratory-based scientists and epidemiologists on effects and associations of various environmental
toxicants (EDCs, air pollution, heavy metals) on the health
of humans and other animals. These studies paralleled efforts
by other scientists and physicians who were trying to determine underlying causes of infertility in men and women
and who were also advancing therapies for human infertility,
including assisted reproductive technologies (ART). Of note,
initially, different constituents were thinking about and

MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM
Our water, air, soil, and food are increasingly polluted with
chemicals and heavy metals. Notable is the explosive increase
in chemical manufacturing and processing after World War II,
which has contributed to the 90,000 chemicals currently in
use globally (www.statista.com/statistics/272157/chemicalproduction-forecast-worldwide). In the U.S., 9.5 trillion
pounds of industrial chemicals are manufactured and imported (30,000 pounds/person), annually. In most countries,
including the U.S., there are few if any regulations around
tracking chemical production, use, waste, and recycling;
moreover, assessments of toxicity to humans, including
reproductive health, are minimal. If there is suspicion of
possible harm after a chemical enters the marketplace, individuals, affected groups, government agencies, and environmentally aware citizens variably begin ad hoc postexposure
observational studies and in vitro and in vivo toxicity testing.
This is in marked contrast to pharmaceuticals which have
extensive in vitro and in vivo toxicity preclinical studies, followed by randomized clinical trials (RCTs) for safety and efﬁcacy, and if proven to be safe and efﬁcacious, enter the
marketplace with postexposure observational studies thereafter. The limited safety testing of environmental chemicals
prompted the Director of the U.S. National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences to state that environmental chemicals ‘‘act like uncontrolled medicines’’ (317). This is indeed
concerning for reproductive health and human health more
broadly, as well as for wildlife and the ecosystem.

242
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
FIGURE 17

Processes affected by endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs). (A) Effects of EDCs on the ovary, showing normal developmental stages disrupted by
EDCs that are listed in red above or below the likely site of action; from (316) with permission. (B) effects of EDCs on uterus, vagina, and anterior
pituitary gland, with EDCs listed in red that adversely affect development and function of these structures; from (316) with permission. (C)
hypothesis of testicular dysgenesis syndrome (TDS) involving poor spermatogenesis, hypospadias, cryptorchidism, short anogenital distance
(AGD), and testicular cancer, together or individually constituting risk factors for reduced fecundity; from (321) with permission.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICANTS AND
REPRODUCTIVE PROCESSES:
WHAT IS THE EVIDENCE?
During the past two decades, there has been an explosion of
research reports and scholarly reviews on EDCs and other environmental toxicants on animal and human development and
reproduction. The data support causal and associative effects
of EDCs (Fig. 17) on gonadal, the hypothalamic-pituitarygonadal (HPG) axis, and reproductive tract development and
function relevant to fertility potential. Associated disorders
include aneuploidy, premature ovarian insufﬁciency (POI),
polycystic ovarian syndrome, endometriosis, ﬁbroids, miscarriage, endocrine cancers, lactation, and altered pubertal timing
(316–319)
(www.who.int/ceh/publications/endocrine/en/).
Figure 17 shows ‘‘hotspots’’ of ovarian follicle disruption
associated with prenatal and postnatal exposures to EDCs
(Fig. 17A) and perturbations of development and function of
the female reproductive tract and HPG axis (Fig. 17B).
Recently a systematic review and meta-analysis of 97 studies
evaluated POI and environmental toxicants and found that bi-

sphenol A, phthalates, pesticides, and cigarette smoking most
commonly had a negative impact on ovarian function
(increased follicular depletion, earlier age of menopause),
regardless of when exposures occurred (320). EDCs can disrupt
each step in steroidogenesis in the ovary (316) and testis (321).
Moreover, Leydig and Sertoli cell function disrupted in the
developing and adult testis results in decreased INSL3 and
testosterone production and impaired germ cell differentiation
(Fig. 17C). Strong data implicate environmental and genetic effects resulting in the ‘‘testicular dysgenesis syndrome,’’ resulting
in reduced male fecundity and inﬂuencing pregnancy rates
(321). Much of the nonhuman animal data provide information
about mechanisms of EDC actions, including affecting steroid
hormone-signaling pathways, altered gene expression, and
epigenetic alterations affecting gene expression (316).

ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICANTS AND ART:
WHAT IS THE EVIDENCE?
In 1998, a Modern Trends article in Fertility and Sterility reviewed then-current data regarding effects of environmental

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
243
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
toxicants (EDCs, heavy metals, solvents, other industrial
chemicals, pesticides, and cigarette smoke) on female reproduction in laboratory animals, wildlife, and humans (322).
Although the authors found that most of these agents had effects on reproductive outcomes in animals, effects on women’s
reproductive health were inconclusive except for cigarette
smoking. The latter altered success rates in ART cycles in female smokers. Eight reviewed studies gave a common odds ratio (OR) for conception of 0.6 (95% conﬁdence interval [CI]:
0.5–0.7) among smokers, and diminished ovarian reserve
was found in smokers versus nonsmokers (OR: 2.8, 95% CI:
1.2–7.9) as well as elevated basal or stimulated FSH levels in
smokers versus age-matched nonsmokers (322). We now
know that second-hand smoke in women and smoking in
men reduce gamete quality and IVF outcomes (323).
In 2005, Foster et al. (324) reviewed literature from 1979–
2004 linking infertility and IVF success with occupational exposures to hazardous substances. They concluded that ‘‘there
was a paucity of data linking exposure of humans to hazardous substances and IVF success’’ and extrapolated the plausibility of adverse events in humans from animal and cell
culture studies. Only effects of cigarette smoking on IVF outcomes cited in Sharara et al. (322) were identiﬁed.
Although the majority of environmental health studies
over the past 20 years have focused on human health and
reproductive health and factors that can affect infertility
risk (Fig. 17), more recently effects and correlations of EDCs
and air pollution on parameters that inﬂuence IVF outcomes
(e.g., ovarian reserve) and IVF outcomes per se (oocyte quality, sperm parameters, aneuploidy, follicular and embryo dynamics, peak serum E2 levels, fertilization rates, endometrial
thickness, implantation rates, pregnancy rates, and miscarriage rates) have been evaluated. A recent systematic review
was undertaken of well-designed prospective cohort studies
published from 2000 to 2016, wherein EDC exposure assessment was based on biomarkers of exposure, documented
associations of exposures to environmental EDCs, and the
reproductive potential of women undergoing IVF (323). It
included data from the Environment and Reproductive
Health study (www.hsph.harvard.edu/earth/), the Longitudinal Investigation of Fertility and the Environment
(www.nichd.nih.gov), the Study of Metals and Assisted
Reproductive Technologies (www.albany.edu/sph/bloom),
and others and demonstrated that exposures to EDCs are
negatively associated with several IVF end points (Table 7).
Recently, higher consumption of high-pesticide-residue
fruits and vegetables was found to be associated with lower
probability of pregnancy and live birth after treatment with
ART, underscoring that typical human pesticide exposure
from dietary sources may compromise IVF outcomes (325).
A recent systematic review of nonhuman animal studies and
human epidemiologic studies from 2000–2016, including
data from the U.S. Nurses’ Health Study II, on exposures to
environmental air pollutants (air quality, O3, NO2, SO2, particulate matter <2.5 mm [PM2.5], PM10, diesel exhaust, and
proximity to major roads) and fertility underscored challenges
in conducting such research (326). Human reports included
retrospective birth cohort studies measuring average monthly
exposure during the 2-4 months before attempting concep-

TABLE 7
Negative IVF outcomes associated with endocrine-disrupting
chemicals in women.
Outcome
Decreased serum E2 levels: BPA
Decreased serum AMH levels: PCBs
Low antral follicle count: PGA, parabens, phthalates
Poor oocyte quality: BPA, triclosan, phthalates, PCBs
Low fertilization rates: PFCs, PCBs
Low implantation rates: BPA, phthalates, PCBs
Poor embryo quality: triclosan, PCBs, BPA
Low clinical pregnancy and live birth rates: parabens, phthalates
Note: AMH ¼ antim€
ullerian hormone; BPA ¼ bisphenol A; PCB ¼ polychlorinated biphenyl;
PGA ¼ poly(glycolic acid).
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

tion, prospective cohort studies, and retrospective cohort
studies examining associations between numbers of oocytes
retrieved, fertilization rates, embryo morphology, and pregnancy outcomes, with exposures assessed during speciﬁed
time periods from stimulation to live birth. Overall, the data
support decreased fertility for couples living in close proximity
to major roads, and mixed data were found on effects of speciﬁc air pollutants and PM exposures with live birth rates. One
study found decreased odds of live birth with NO2 throughout
stimulation to pregnancy outcome, but for O3 only exposure
during the latter period correlated with decreased live birth.
Another study revealed that high exposures to PM10 were
not correlated with adverse IVF outcomes, although they
correlated with increased odds of clinical early pregnancy
loss (326). Clearly, more studies are needed to determine effects of air pollution in reproductive and ART success.

ASSESSING THE EVIDENCE:
HOW GOOD ARE THE DATA?
Historically, expert literature reviews formed the basis of evaluating health care research and guided decision making for recommendations. After challenges in the 1970s and with
demonstrated superiority of systematic reviews and patient outcomes (327), in 2000 the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system was
initiated (www.gradeworkinggroup.org). GRADE, a formal, systematic approach that includes rigorous methodologies to evaluate speciﬁc questions, grades the quality of scientiﬁc evidence
and strength of recommendations and is widely used in clinical
and public health research. In contrast, literature on effects of
environmental toxicants on human health and reproduction
have relied on expert literature reviews, mainly because the
methodologies for grading quality of evidence and strength of
recommendations are difﬁcult to shoehorn into clinical and
public health reporting. Recent systematic reviews (above) are
comprehensive and conformed to the Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis guidelines (prismastatement.org), although strength of the evidence and recommendations are challenging to deduce. To overcome these limitations and bridge the gap between clinical and environmental
health sciences, international experts were convened in 2010
by scientists Tracey Woodruff and Patrice Sutton at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) to develop the

244
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
Navigation Guide (327). This systematic review guidance has
four parts: specify the study question; systematically select evidence from the literature; rate quality and strength of the evidence in nonhuman and human systems (sufﬁcient, limited, or
inadequate, or evidence of lack of toxicity with a ﬁnal overall
strength of evidence integrated from the human and nonhuman
evidence as known to be toxic, probably toxic, possibly toxic, or
not classiﬁable); and grade strength of the recommendation
(Strong or Discretionary recommendation) (327). This systematic approach requires dedicated personnel and resources and
has had led to more scientiﬁcally robust evidence evaluations
for human pregnancy outcomes, reproductive effects and neurodevelopmental effects (prhe.ucsf.edu/navigation-guide),
although effects of select chemicals on fertility and IVF outcomes await further study.

GETTING ALL THE STAKEHOLDERS TOGETHER
AND MOVING FORWARD
In general, patients, scientists, policy makers, funders, and
health care providers rarely have an opportunity to strategize
together about impacts on all stakeholders. To overcome this
in the emerging ﬁeld of reproductive environmental health
and based on the accumulating literature and increasing concerns about environmental effects on reproductive health and
fertility, the Vallombrosia Workshop was convened in 2005 in
Menlo Park, California. The workshop, ‘‘Understanding Environmental Contaminants and Human Fertility: Science and
Strategy,’’ was organized by Stanford University and the
Collaborative on Health and the Environment (CHE) and
had 40 participants. Its goal was to build a network of scientists, policy makers, and affected communities to assess the
state of the science about contributions of environmental
contaminants, speciﬁcally synthetic compounds and heavy
metals, to human infertility and associated health conditions,
identify gaps regarding impacts of environmental contaminants on human infertility, and support and advocate for
enhanced research in the ﬁeld. This was the ﬁrst time in the
U.S. that researchers in reproductive epidemiology, biology,
toxicology, and clinical medicine convened with representatives of relevant professional societies—infertility support,
women’s health, and reproductive advocacy organizations—
government ofﬁcials, and funders to review the state of environmental health science relevant to infertility. The outcomes
of this workshop included the Vallombrosa Consensus Statement on Environmental Contaminants and Human Fertility
Compromise (328) and a lay monograph, ‘‘Challenged
Conceptions: Environmental Chemicals and Fertility’’
(https://www.healthandenvironment.org/environmentalhealth/health-diseases-and-disabilities/reproductive-healthresearch-and-resources).
The content and format of the Vallombrosia Workshop
were subsequently expanded to a multidisciplinary, summit,
the ‘‘UCSF-CHE Summit on Environmental Challenges to
Reproductive Health and Fertility,’’ in San Francisco in
2007. More than 400 participants came from around the
globe. Its goals were to increase awareness and expertise
among medical and public health professionals, basic and
clinical scientists, policy makers, advocates, funders, and

reproductive and community health leaders about these issues
and expand the network to support enhanced reproductive
health research agendas, educational programs, and public
health policy actions. A report on the summit, ‘‘Shaping Our
Legacy,’’ and the scientiﬁc proceedings that covered the state
of the science in male and female reproductive tract and
fertility compromise with a focus on humans and published
as an online supplement in Fertility and Sterility in February
2008, are available, respectively, at prhe.ucsf.edu/sites/
prhe.ucsf.edu/ﬁles/shapingourlegacy.pdf and www.fertstert.org/issue/S0015-0282(08)X0190-6.
Momentum has been carried and expanded by other
groups with a focus on reproduction, pregnancy, fertility outcomes, developmental origins of health and disease, and children’s environmental health. Stakeholders include some
academic medical centers, the Endocrine Society, American
Society for Reproductive Medicine, American College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, European Society for Human
Reproduction and Embryology, Society for Canadian Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Royal College of Obstetricians
and Gynaecologists, International Federation of Obstetricians
and Gynaecologists, International Federation of Fertility Societies, American Pediatric Association, the Targeting Environmental Neuro-Development Risks Project, WHO/UNEP,
EDC Gordon Research Conference, and others. These groups
have issued evidence-based scientiﬁc statements and conducted special scientiﬁc symposia and postgraduate courses,
and are working globally with other stakeholders to establish
patient information access, incorporate environmental health
into reproductive and developmental science and medicine
research and education, and advocate for policy changes
regarding protecting the environment and human health.
Some medical schools, e.g., UCSF, are including curriculum
about environmental reproductive health to train future physicians. Remarkably, even with all these efforts, most physicians are not aware of data supporting adverse health
effects of the environment on reproductive health and fertility
and therefore are hesitant to discuss these issues with
patients (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4070906/).
Globally, minimizing environmental threats to human health
and reproduction is part of the WHO Sustainable Development
Goals 2015-2030 (https://una-gp.org/the-sustainable-development-goals-2015-2030), although political, economic, and social challenges remain. It is hoped that stakeholders will
continue to collaborate and move the agenda forward, because
there is much at stake for reproductive health and fertility for this
and future generations.

OBESITY AND REPRODUCTION
Robert J. Norman, M.D., C.R.E.I.
Early studies on weight and reproduction
The original description of what is now known as the polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) noted the correlation of obesity
and anovulation with infertility. Much later, classic studies
conﬁrmed these ﬁndings in very much larger groups of

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
245
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
women, few of whom had PCOS. Mitchell and Rogers (329)
noted that obesity was four times higher in women with menstrual disturbances than in women who had regular cycles.
Hartz et al. (330) questioned over 26,000 women and noted
that grossly obese women had a three times higher rate of
menstrual disturbance than those in the normal weight range.
They also noted that teenage obesity was more closely related
to menstrual irregularities later in life. In 1958, Lake et al.
(331) studied 5,800 children and noted very strong correlations between childhood obesity and risks of menstrual abnormalities in adult life. All these studies were subject to
conﬁrmation by many other investigators, and the concept
that obesity and being overweight impacts menstrual
dysfunction became well established.
The Nurses’ Health Study showed a very strong correlation between body mass index (BMI) and infertility, which
was partially but not completely explained by abnormal menstrual periods (332). Many of the participants who desired
pregnancy and were obese were shown to be anovulatory
and required fertility treatment with an emerging group of
fertility drugs, including clomiphene citrate and gonadotropins (333). In turn, the increasing success and availability of
in vitro fertilization (IVF) and assisted reproduction (ART)
procedures meant that more overweight and obese women
were entering treatment programs.

Trends in weight in women of reproductive age
In past centuries, infertility and anovulation were probably
linked to being underweight, with a hypothalamic origin
leading to delayed puberty and subsequent abnormal periods.
In the past few decades, particularly in the West, the problem
of obesity has become extremely consequential (334) and now
has a great impact on fertility management in general and assisted reproduction in particular. This increase is not conﬁned
to developing countries; it is a worldwide problem with many
other health effects, including diabetes mellitus and hypertension, that overlap with reproduction.

tokines that may play an important role in modulating the
reproductive axis.

Treatment consequences of obesity in women
Fertility drug distribution is hampered in overweight people, who
require higher doses of oral agents or gonadotropins. Different
oral ovulation induction drugs may be required, depending on
BMI, and the beneﬁcial effects of one agent may be preferred
over another. With procedures such as egg recovery in overweight women there also is a higher likelihood of anesthetic
problems, difﬁculty in egg recovery, and postoperative complications such as thromboembolic problems. Once a pregnancy
commences, a higher BMI may be correlated with a greater rate
of miscarriage, regardless of whether a euploid embryo has
been replaced. Gestational diabetes, pregnancy-induced hypertension, congenital abnormalities, difﬁculties during delivery,
and puerperal complications also may compromise outcomes.
Many large studies have examined the effect of obesity on pregnancy outcomes as well as the long-term consequences for the
offspring. The problems of large babies and exposure to an
abnormal intrauterine environment are thought to be potentially
consequential for the children of obese mothers (336).

Obesity and male fertility
An emerging literature has linked poor endocrine and semen
analysis parameters to obesity. An obese male, regardless of
the weight of his partner, may be more prone to producing lower
fertilization, poor-quality embryos, and a lower pregnancy rate
in an in vitro fertilization (IVF) program (337). As the partners of
many overweight men are overweight women, the fertility effects are compounded. Recent data from rodents suggest that
there are epigenetic transmission mechanisms wherein male
obesity may inﬂuence offspring for several generations. There
are no data as yet for humans, but there is sufﬁcient concern
to recommend that male partners should be advised about the
impact of obesity on infertility and poor outcomes.

Metabolic consequences

Implications for IVF procedures

Overweight and obese individuals have a much higher prevalence of insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, hypertension,
and hyperlipidemia contributing to the metabolic syndrome.
This is particularly pronounced in PCOS. This may contribute
to the lack of ovulation or the failure to become pregnant in a
woman who has regular periods. It has been shown that the
prevalence of diabetes mellitus is at least four times higher
in patients with PCOS, even those with relatively mild weight
problems (335). The effects may vary depending on the distribution of fat—central or peripheral—as shown by studies from
the Netherlands on the use of donor sperm in women of the
same average BMI but different waist and hip circumferences.
This may be related to well-recognized insulin and glucose
homeostasis differences in these women.
The discovery of leptin in rodents raised the prospect that
high leptin levels in obese women might lead to anovulation,
but the role of leptin in infertility in humans is not as clear as
it is in other species. However, there are many other adipocy-

As many more men and women are seeking fertility treatment
through IVF, it has become apparent that pregnancy rates are
probably lower when BMI is higher. Several meta-analyses
have indicated that especially high BMIs are associated with
signiﬁcantly lower rates of ongoing pregnancies and greater
fetal losses (338). At least two mechanisms appear to inﬂuence
these outcomes. First, the quality of the egg is affected by
exposure to metabolic derangements in the mother, including
high levels of insulin, glucose, and lipids. Studies have shown
a much higher lipid level in oocytes from female rodents given
a high-fat diet and the presence of endoplasmic reticulum
stress leading to derangements of mitochondrial function,
increased apoptosis, and lower fertilization (339). Some of
these effects can be eliminated through change of diet, exercise, or effective drugs that alter endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Second, in a less well-understood mechanism, endometrial dysfunction appears to manifest even when a normal
embryo that developed well in the laboratory is transferred

246
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
to an obese recipient. This is also reﬂected by lower pregnancy
rates in donor egg recipients who have a high BMI, although
with less effect if only the donor is overweight. And, as noted
earlier, there are substantially increased risks with the procedure of IVF and the subsequent pregnancy.

Lifestyle management
Initial studies from Adelaide and London (340, 341) suggested
that weight loss of about 5% before fertility interventions can
lead to far better reproductive outcomes, regardless of
whether the women undergoes treatment. These relatively
small, uncontrolled studies need larger, randomized,
controlled trials to conﬁrm their ﬁndings. In women with
polycystic ovary syndrome several studies have shown the
beneﬁt of lifestyle intervention, but there is less evidence
from randomized controlled trials for patients with general
infertility who are overweight women undergoing medical
fertility treatment. Because many patients drop out from
lifestyle studies and others demand more-rapid medical intervention, none of these studies can be shown to be deﬁnitive at
present. Traditional weight-loss drugs have also generally
been shown to be ineffective.
As noted previously, the presence of an overweight male
partner may complicate studies. Our group has taken the
approach of offering lifestyle programs to couples rather
than only to the woman. This intervention allows both the
male and female partners to obtain metabolic beneﬁts, and
it is much easier to arrange within a household.

The role of weight loss and insulin-reduction drugs
Because many patients present relatively late in reproductive
life and do not readily accept long-term lifestyle programs,
there has been some demand for weight-loss agents, bariatric
surgery, and insulin-lowering drugs such as metformin.
Drugs such as orlistat and appetite suppressants do not have
convincing evidence in treatments, but metformin may
reduce the risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome and increase pregnancy rates on IVF programs.
Bariatric surgery has generally been considered to produce
better fertility results, but the patient normally must wait for at
least 12 months after surgery before trying to become pregnant. Surgery is probably the only truly effective option for
extremely overweight and obese women to regain some metabolic normality; procedures such as gastric stapling or bypass
can produce substantial weight loss. However, the surgery has
signiﬁcant risks in very overweight patients, and it may be
expensive. Also, excessive weight loss attempts that occur
very rapidly around pregnancy can have bad outcomes.

Ethics issues in fertility treatment of
obese individuals
Some health authorities, funding bodies, and clinics have
instituted protocols or rules that prohibit funded fertility programs unless the female patient reduces her weight to a
certain BMI, such as 32 kg/m2. Other ofﬁcial professional
bodies have produced guidelines that indicate treatment
beyond a certain BMI is inappropriate, and that it may open
practitioners to legal risk if they operate outside these parameters. The epidemiological and medical logic for this approach

TABLE 8
Key points on the effect of obesity on fertility.
Obesity in women and men
 Obesity is related to many systematic diseases and abnormalities in
hormones and reproductive function.
 Obesity can be measured clinically by body mass index (BMI), waist
circumference, and waist–hip ratio. A waste–hip ratio >0.8 deﬁnes
an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and a reduced
cumulative pregnancy rate.
Obesity with PCOS
 Among women with PCOS, 30% to 50% are overweight or obese.
Obesity, particularly abdominal obesity, ampliﬁes hyperinsulinemia
and the metabolic syndrome.
Obesity with reproduction
 Obesity is related to menstrual abnormalities; amenorrhea, oligomenorrhea, and menorrhagia are fourfold higher in obese women.
 Obesity contributes to anovulatory and ovulatory infertility via an
imbalance among estrogen, androgen, and sex hormone-binding
globulin.
 Hyperandrogenism and hyperleptinemia are related to anovulatory
and ovulatory infertility in obese women.
 Obesity may affect sexual activity, sperm quality, and DNA
fragmentation.
Obesity with assisted reproduction
 The adverse effects of obesity include oocyte, sperm, and endometrial components.
 Obesity may reduce the likelihood that a woman will be accepted
for assisted reproductive techniques (ART) treatment, particularly
when outside funding is involved rather than private.
 Obesity is associated with an impaired response to ovarian stimulation and a lower chance of a live birth after in vitro fertilization
and intracytoplasmic sperm induction.
Obesity with obstetric care
 Being overweight or obese increases obstetric risks in a BMIdependent manner, including the risks of diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, and preeclampsia. The risk of perinatal death and
congenital abnormalities is doubled with an obese mother.
Obesity management
Lifestyle intervention
 Weight loss improves menstrual regularity, ovulation, and
fertility, and it should be promoted as an initial treatment option for obese women with infertility. A weight loss of only 3%
to 5% is needed to restore ovulation and natural pregnancy.
 Evidence is presently lacking for the full effect of lifestyle
modiﬁcation on IVF outcomes.
 Lifestyle modiﬁcations are the best way to achieve and sustain
weight loss. These include sensible dieting, regular exercise,
cognitive behavior therapy, and a supportive group
environment.
Pharmacologic and surgical intervention
 Pharmacologic intervention with ovulation-inducing drugs can
improve pregnancy and live-birth rates among obese women
with PCOS.
 Pharmacologic intervention with weight-loss inducing drugs
are not generally helpful for improving IVF results.
 Surgical intervention should be reserved for when other
weight-reduction measures have failed. Although surgery can
be effective, it must be accompanied by dietary modiﬁcations
and behavioral changes.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

is strong, but others have argued that when there is a reasonable although reduced chance of pregnancy, personal autonomy and patient choice should override any guidelines from
professional and ofﬁcial bodies. Thus, decisions are often
made on the basis of available funding and personal considerations rather than true medical evidence.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
247
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
Obesity, reproduction, and the future for
fertility treatment
Forty years ago, the issue of obesity or other lifestyle-related
conditions was irrelevant compared with the technical challenges and failures that beset IVF. Sorting out ovarian stimulation, egg recovery, embryo growth, and implantation were
issues of far greater import. We are now looking for much
smaller improvements, given our great leaps forward over
the past four decades. We also are facing a much higher proportion of patients with lifestyle-related conditions, including
obesity. We now understand the importance of preconception
advice and care for anyone who is planning a pregnancy,
whether it be natural or medically induced (342, 343).

All fertility programs now have enough evidence to provide preconception advice on weight for both partners
(Table 8), and these programs should consider providing sufﬁcient resources to allow their patients to access weight treatment interventions. Obesity is known to be associated with
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and
cancer, but its shadow on the early and established stages
of reproductive life is equally damaging—to the individual,
to his or her relationship with a partner, and to any pregnancy
that may result. We have an obligation to provide information, intervention, and support for our patients affected by
this condition.

CONTROLLED OVARIAN STIMULATION AND MONITORING
OVARIAN MECHANISMS
UNDERLYING EVOLVING ASSISTED
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES
Aaron J. Hsueh, Ph.D., and
Yingpu Sun, M.D., Ph.D.
History of in vitro fertilization and evolving assisted
reproduction technology
The original in vitro fertilization (IVF) procedure developed by
Steptoe and Edwards was based on obtaining mature oocytes
during natural cycles for patients with fallopian tube defects.
Successful application of IVF was followed by the use of gonadotropins to stimulate multiple preovulatory follicles for
treating infertile patients without tubal defects. This was followed by the development of diverse, related assisted reproduction technologies (ART). Because the evolution of ART
relies on advances in ovarian physiology, this review addresses the underlying ovarian mechanisms. Oocyte vitriﬁcation and/or donation have become accepted techniques, and
ovarian tissue freezing is gaining acceptance. And, although
the mitochondria content of oocytes has been negatively
correlated with implantation potential, there is no evidence
that oocyte selection through noninvasive measurement of
the mitochondria DNA load increases live-birth rate (344).
We will discuss ovary-associated ART starting from preovulatory follicles back to primordial follicles.

Does controlled ovarian stimulation yield
suboptimal oocytes?
In the human menstrual cycle, 20 early antral follicles are
found at the early follicular stage, but only one progresses to
the preovulatory stage, capable of releasing one mature oocyte
for fertilization. The follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
threshold model for preovulatory follicle selection in primates
(345) proposes that regression of the corpus luteum at the end

of the cycle releases the negative feedback suppression of FSH
secretion, which leads to a rise in serum FSH above threshold
levels. One (or occasionally more) of the maturing preantral
follicles containing sufﬁcient granulosa cells expressing FSH
receptors is stimulated by the increased FSH and acquires aromatase enzyme and luteinizing hormone (LH) receptors. The
acquisition of aromatase results in a rise in circulating estrogens capable of suppressing FSH secretion; this in turn prevents the maturation of less mature follicles. The FSHstimulated induction of LH receptors, together with the
enhanced secretion of local estrogens and diverse growth factors—such as insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF)—increases the LH responsiveness of granulosa cells in the ‘‘selected’’ follicle and permits it to mature in the presence of FSH concentrations that
are insufﬁcient to stimulate other less mature follicles.
Although recruitment of a large number of preovulatory
follicles after controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) could lead
to the retrieval of subpar oocytes, several studies have indicated that, for younger patients, the pregnancy rates per cycle
after COS are higher than in natural cycles, and the cumulative
live-birth rates are comparable between COS and natural cycles. In addition to gonadotropins, paracrine factors—such as
growth differentiation factor 9 (GDF9) and bone morphogenetic proteins 15 and 6 (BMP15, BMP6)—secreted by oocytes
also promote follicle growth (346); follicular ﬂuid levels of
these factors are associated with increased IVF success.
However, in older patients follicles containing oocytes of
high quality could secrete more paracrine factors and promote
folliculogenesis for recruitment during natural cycles whereas
COS could lead to retrieval of suboptimal oocytes. Indeed,
COS has led to lower implantation rates as compared with
the natural cycle in older patients (35–42 years of age).
Answer: A qualiﬁed no.

Can in vitro maturation of oocytes be optimized?
Because in vitro maturation (IVM) is addressed more fully
elsewhere in this supplement, we will only describe the
ovarian mechanisms. Mainly a technique for avoiding

248
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 18
Preovulatory
follicle

Cumulus-oocyte
complexes

BDNF, IGFI,
FGF10, GDNF, LIF,
amphiregulin, etc.

Cumulus cells have low LH
In response to the LH surge, granulosa cells
receptors and are unable to
produce paracrine factors to promote
respond to the LH surge.
cytoplasmic matura on of oocytes, which are
essen al for op mal early embryo development.
Preovulatory luteinizing (LH) surge stimulates granulosa cells to secrete local growth factors essential for oocyte development into early embryos.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

ovarian hyperstimulation, IVM involves aspirating germinal
vesicle-stage oocytes from early antral follicles in unprimed
or minimally stimulated cycles, especially from PCOS patients. These oocytes, complexed with cumulus cells,
spontaneously resume meiosis to metaphase II before
fertilization.
Rodent studies have indicated that granulosa cells in preantral and antral follicles secrete C-type natriuretic factor
(CNP) to suppress germinal vesicle breakdown of oocytes.
Furthermore, CNP levels decrease after granulosa cells are
exposed to the midcycle LH surge (347), leading to meiosis
resumption and nuclear maturation. Thus, the isolation of
cumulus-oocyte complexes or denuded oocytes from antral
follicles during IVM allows spontaneous germinal vesicle
breakdown. The cytoplasmic maturation of oocytes essential
for early embryonic development is inadequate for IVM oocytes. Indeed, animal studies have indicated that multiple
granulosa cell–derived paracrine factors are stimulated by
the LH surge to act on oocytes or cumulus cells in promoting
early embryonic development. These include brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (348), IGF-I, ﬁbroblast growth factor 10 (FGF10), glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF),
leukemic inhibiting factor (LIF), and amphiregulin (Fig. 18).
Exposure of preovulatory follicles to the LH surge also is
important for gene transcription and post-transcriptional
modiﬁcation. Rodent and human studies have indicated
that cumulus cells express low levels of LH receptors as
compared with mural granulosa cells, rendering the supplementation of LH/human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in
IVM media inadequate. Although some IVM studies have
used oocytes from patients after both FSH and hCG priming,
it is uncertain whether the granulosa cells from treated follicles acquired adequate levels of LH receptors to respond to
LH/hCG.
Because the beneﬁcial effects of many of these paracrine
factors have been extended to human early embryo cultures
(349), inclusion of these factors during culture could promote

IVM success. Because most IVM involves the practice of minimizing or even avoiding exogenous gonadotropin administration to collect cumulus-enclosed immature oocytes from
small antral follicles of PCOS patients, IVM of these oocytes
should be optimized by adding ovarian paracrine factors,
including CNP (to delay nuclear maturation) and abovementioned paracrine factors (to promote cytoplasmic
maturation).
Answer: Yes.

Can ovarian damage lead to preantral
follicle activation?
Classic studies using wedge resection and laparoscopic laser
drilling have demonstrated the efﬁcacy of ovarian damage
procedures for promoting early antral follicle growth in
polycystic ovaries. Our group has demonstrated the important role of Hippo signaling disruption in promoting preantral follicle growth in patients with primary ovarian
insufﬁciency (POI) who underwent the in vitro activation
(IVA) procedure (350). Our POI patients at 4 to 6 years after
menses cessation were treated with IVA therapy consisting
of fragmentation of ovarian cortical strips into cubes (Hippo
signaling disruption) followed by incubation with drugs to
stimulate protein kinase B (Akt) to promote follicle growth.
After grafting ovarian cubes to a ‘‘pouch’’ constructed in the
fallopian tube, about half of our POI patients with residual
follicles showed follicle growth, and oocytes were retrieved
in some patients for IVF and embryo transfer, leading to
successful pregnancies and delivery. Because ovarian fragmentation without Akt drug exposure also promoted follicle
growth (350), further improvement of ovarian disruption
procedures using in situ disruption of ovarian Hippo
signaling via mechanical or chemical approaches could promote preantral follicle growth in POI patients or patients
with diminishing ovarian reserve.
Answer: Yes.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
249
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 19
Serum AMH

Medium

High

Medium or low

Low

Undetectable

Preovulatory
follicle

Antral
follicles
Early antral
follicles

Secondary
follicles
Primary
follicles
Primordial
follicles

Cycling

PCOS

Middle-aged
infer le women

Primary ovarian
insuﬃciency

€ llerian hormone levels vary with different physiological and pathological states.
Serum antimu
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

€
DO SERUM ANTIMULLERIAN
HORMONE
LEVELS REFLECT FOLLICLE RESERVE?
This supplement deals with the topic of antim€
ullerian
hormone (AMH) elsewhere; our discussion is limited to
ovarian physiology. At any given time, there are multiple follicles at different developmental stages inside the
ovary. Antim€
ullerian hormone is a paracrine hormone,
and AMH secretion increases in primary and secondary
follicles, reaching high levels in the early antral stage
but decreasing in preovulatory follicles. Follicles 5–8
mm in diameter contribute 60% of the circulating
AMH; the granulosa cells of preovulatory follicles
>10 mm in diameter fail to produce AMH in normal
women.
Because AMH is not an endocrine hormone, the serum
levels of AMH mainly reﬂect ‘‘leakage’’ from the ovary, and
absolute serum levels of AMH do not necessarily reﬂect the
number of ovarian follicles. Although detection of serum
AMH indicates the presence of secondary or early antral follicles, one cannot rule out the presence of non-AMHsecreting primordial follicles (Fig. 19). Indeed, patients with
undetectable AMH levels have responded to IVA treatment
due to presence of residual primordial follicles (351). Thus,
detection of serum AMH ensures the presence of secondary
follicles, but serum AMH levels do not accurately reﬂect
ovarian reserve.
Answer: Only partially.

IS IT POSSIBLE TO DIAGNOSE THE PRESENCE OF
PREANTRAL FOLLICLES IN VIVO?
Because the prevailing transvaginal ultrasound approach
does not allow imaging of preantral follicles, our group
recently conjugated a small molecular near infrared-II ﬂuorophore to FSH for imaging FSH receptors in granulosa cells of
preantral follicles in live mice (352). Because FSH receptors
are expressed in primary and larger follicles and the ﬂuorophore has low cell toxicity and rapid clearance, future clinical
studies could reveal whether this approach is useful for detecting preantral follicles in patients with low ovarian reserve.
Answer: Yes.

Is DHEA supplementation useful for patients with
diminished ovarian reserve?
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) supplementation has been
reported to improve ovarian function, increase pregnancy
chances, reduce aneuploidy, and lower miscarriage rates in
patients with diminished ovarian reserve (DOR) (353). However, a meta-analysis that included 200 IVF cycles indicated
there is insufﬁcient evidence for the efﬁciency of DHEA supplementation in women with DOR or poor responders (354).
Furthermore, no improvement in ovarian response markers,
ovarian response to gonadotropin stimulation, or IVF outcomes was found in poor responders receiving DHEA pretreatment (355).

250
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
The requirement of androgens for folliculogenesis is
based on studies in mice with granulosa cell–speciﬁc deletion
of androgen receptors, which showed more preantral and atretic follicles together with fewer antral follicles and corpus
lutea. However, gain-of-function mutations in the LH receptor gene led to male-limited precocious puberty with elevated
androgen secretion, but the mothers of these patients carrying
the same mutation showed normal fertility; this suggested
that elevation of androgen biosynthesis by a constitutively
activated LH receptor in thecal cells has minimal impact on
follicle development. Because there is minimal evidence for
androgen deﬁciency in DOR patients, the exact effects of
exogenous androgens on follicle growth are difﬁcult to investigate in vivo.
In hypophysectomized, estrogen-primed rats, exogenous androgens induced atresia in preantral follicles that
was associated with apoptosis in granulosa cells. Furthermore, DHEA is a ‘‘prehormone’’ that is converted to androgens and estrogens by 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
and aromatases, respectively. In addition to their endocrine
actions on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis, both estrogens
and androgens have potent paracrine actions in the ovary.
Therefore, it is difﬁcult to decipher the mechanisms underlying putative ‘‘positive’’ effects of exogenous DHEA on follicle development in infertile women. Oral administration of
DHEA is further complicated by varying absorption rates.
Due to expected variations in DHEA absorption, metabolism, and sites of actions in DOR patients, it is unlikely
that DHEA supplementation could yield consistent
outcomes.
Answer: No.

IS IT POSSIBLE TO OBTAIN MATURE OOCYTES
AFTER IN VITRO GROWTH OF HUMAN
PRIMORDIAL FOLLICLES?
Using a two-step in vitro growth (IVG) approach, a living
mouse pup was derived from an oocyte in follicles cultured
from the primordial stage. The ovaries of newborn mice
were ﬁrst placed in organ culture for 8 days before
isolating oocyte-granulosa cell complexes for 2 weeks.
The mature oocytes obtained could be fertilized and the
resultant embryos transferred, leading to a live birth. In
humans, cortical tissue explants were cultured to allow primordial follicle growth into preantral follicles followed by
dissection of isolated follicles for culture in microwells
for potential IVM (356). Using another two-step follicle
culture strategy, the human follicles developed from the
preantral to antral stage, and they produced meiotically
competent metaphase II oocytes after IVM. Similarly, secondary human follicles developed to small antral follicles
and remained hormonally active in an alginateencapsulation culture system for several weeks. Because
the growth rate of the cultured follicles appears to be accelerated compared with estimates in vivo, it has raised the
prospects of future clinical utility. However, the prolonged
growth duration and large size of human preovulatory follicles represent major challenges.
Answer: Maybe.

IS IT POSSIBLE TO USE OVARIAN GERM
STEM CELLS OR THEIR MITOCHONDRIA
FOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT?
Earlier studies showed the presence of a ﬁnite, nonreplenishable pool of follicles after birth. However, oocyte formation
by mitotically active germ cells puriﬁed from human ovaries
has been reported (357). A comprehensive review concluded
that the ‘‘evidence strongly denies that new follicles are
formed continuously after birth, but the survival of a population of stem cells of uncertain potency cannot be summarily
dismissed,’’ and asked, ‘‘Could [ovarian germ stem cells]
OSC be a sub-population of germ cells that failed to make
the grade?’’ (358).
In addition, mitochondria from putative OSC were
transferred into oocytes of low responders to ‘‘augment’’
oocyte functions (359) with limited improvement in clinical
outcomes (360). However, the oocyte mitochondria DNA
copy numbers per cell and accumulation of mitochondria
DNA mutations were not found to be different between
older patients with low ovarian reserve and younger ones
(361). Furthermore, if OSCs are homologous with primordial germ cells or oogonia, they are expected to have
only a few thousand copies of mitochondrial DNA
compared with the 160,000 copies found in mature oocytes.
It is also unclear how mitochondria transfer restores oocyte
competence if the aneuploidy is preexisting at metaphase II
in oocytes from aging patients. It is thus unlikely that
mitochondria transfer could boost the embryonic developmental potential of low-quality oocytes obtained from subfertile patients.
Answer: No.

MARKERS OF OVARIAN FUNCTION
FROM FOLLICLE-STIMULATING
€
HORMONE TO ANTIMULLERIAN
HORMONE
Neri Laufer, M.D., Ronit Kochman, M.D., and
Talia Eldar-Geva, M.D., Ph.D.
The birth of Louise Brown in 1978 was achieved in a natural
cycle; after this breakthrough, it was clear that to achieve an
acceptable pregnancy rate, more than one embryo should be
transferred into the uterus and ovulation induction should
be used. In 1980, Lopata and colleagues from Monash University in Australia described the ﬁrst in vitro fertilization (IVF)
birth in Australia employing clomiphene citrate (CC) followed
later by CC with human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG),
which improved pregnancy rates to 6.3% and 18%, respectively. Jones, heading the Norfolk group, achieved the ﬁrst
IVF baby in the United States in 1982 by employing a lowdose hMG regimen. Also in 1982 as well, we used a highdose hMG protocol for ovulation induction. With this relatively aggressive treatment, two opposing phenomena were
noted in young patients: an unexpected reduced or absent

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
251
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 20

Historic development of ovarian reserve markers

OCCT

Day 3 FSH

Ovarian Clomiphene
Citrate Challenge Test

1978 1983

PGD

Oocyte donation

1986

Inhibin B
AFC

GnRH test

Freezing

Louise
Brown

EFORT
Exogenous FSH stimulation test

AMH

Human embryonic
Stem cells

ICSI

1987 1988 1989 1992

1994 1997 1998

2002

2010

Historic development of ovarian reserve markers. Below the dotted grey line is a historic time line of IVF evolution.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

ovarian response in 8% of patients and mild ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) in 1.5% (362). In view of similar
observations throughout the ﬁrst decade of IVF, it became
imperative to develop ovarian reserve tests (ORT) that would
effectively screen patients and help to identify those with a
potentially decreased ovarian response to gonadotropin stimulation and those who were at the greatest risk of developing
ovarian overstimulation (363).
Two types of ORT were developed over time: static and
dynamic. The dynamic tests are evaluated elsewhere (364),
and are beyond the scope of this review. The static tests assess
speciﬁc parameters at a single point in time, and dynamic
tests assess ovarian response to exogenous stimulation.
Figure 20 depicts the time line of these tests. The ﬁrst static
ORT was the CC challenge test, introduced by Navot and colleagues in 1987. After that were the day-3 follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) test developed by Muasher and colleagues in
1988, the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist
test by Padilla and colleagues in 1990, the exogenous FSH
ovarian reserve test (EFORT) by Fanchin and colleagues in
1994, inhibin B measurement by Seifer and colleagues in
1997, antral follicle count (AFC) by Tomas and colleagues
in 1997, and the antim€
ullerian hormone (AMH) test by Van
Rooij in 2002. This review summarizes the development history of the three markers used most frequently in the clinical
practice of IVF: basal FSH, AFC, and AMH levels.

Early follicular follicle-stimulating hormone levels
The decline in the follicular pool leads to a decrease in inhibin
B production, which in turn leads to elevated early follicular
phase FSH levels and a shortened follicular phase. Accord-

ingly, early follicular phase serum FSH levels are inversely
correlated with the number of follicles in the ovary as determined histologically. The use of early follicular basal FSH as a
marker for ovarian reserve and a tool in assessing ovarian
response to controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) was ﬁrst
suggested by the Norfolk group in the late 1980s and early
1990s. This group demonstrated that higher day-3 FSH levels
(but not day-3 LH levels) positively correlated with the age of
patients and that the estradiol (E2) response to stimulation and
the number of oocytes correlated with low levels of FSH and
high levels of LH, as did conception rate per transfer (365). The
same group showed that high baseline FSH levels (>25 mIU/
mL) were associated with a low ongoing pregnancy rate
(3.6%) compared with patients with moderate levels (15–
24.9 mIU/mL) (9.3%) and patients with low FSH levels (<15
mIU/mL) (17%). On the basis of these results it was suggested
that basal FSH levels are predictive of pregnancy outcome and
stimulation characteristics, and may be used to counsel patients. This group later found that basal FSH testing was
limited by intercycle variability, which weakened its reliability. These variations in basal FSH values were found to
be wide, did not predict changes in ovarian response to
gonadotropin stimulation, and could not be used to select
an optimal cycle in which to stimulate an individual patient.
In addition, patients with large intercycle variations responded poorly to gonadotropin stimulation independent of
their basal FSH concentration.
Because reduction in ovarian reserve and the ensuing FSH
increase in the ﬁrst days of the follicular phase stimulate E2
production, it was hypothesized that combining E2 and FSH
would enhance the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the markers.
In a study conducted at Weill Cornell Medicine in New York

252
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 21

Potential markers of ovarian reserve and their ovarian site of evaluation.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

from 1989 through March 1992 it was demonstrated that the
simultaneous evaluation of FSH and E2 levels appeared to
predict pregnancy outcome better than either of these hormone levels used alone (366).
Contrary to the results obtained from the initial retrospective analyses, the predictive value of basal FSH was shown by
numerous additional retrospective and prospective studies to
be considerably weaker (367). From this large body of data it
may be concluded that basal FSH may serve as a predictor of
decreased ovarian response, and that this probability and failure to conceive increase substantially only in women with
very high threshold levels. This fact, combined with a 5%
false-positive rate, precludes the use of basal FSH as a diagnostic test to exclude patients from treatment; rather, it
only functions as a screening test for further investigation.
An abnormally high basal FSH value has a high predictive
value for decreased ovarian response but a normal value
has a low negative predictive value for poor response. A single
abnormal result in women younger than 40 years of age may
not predict poor response or failure to conceive. In addition,
basal FSH has no value in predicting OHSS. The marked shortcomings of basal FSH level as a predictive marker have been a
driving force behind the search for and development of new
markers of ovarian reserve, which began in the second and
third decades of IVF history.

Antral follicle count
The evolution of assisted reproduction technology and ultrasound (US) imaging are tightly connected as the latter provides a reliable platform to visualize reproductive organs

noninvasively. Hackeloer (368) was the ﬁrst to describe the
progressive growth of the maturing follicle. In a pioneering
report as early as 1982, the Norfolk group described the
routine daily use of a real-time abdominal probe for evaluating follicular growth. Soon, US monitoring rather than
serum E2 level was emphasized as the more deﬁnitive clinical
tool for assessing follicular development (369). The same
abdominal US served as a guide for transvesical percutaneous
needle aspiration of oocytes, replacing the original laparoscopic technique of egg retrieval (370). After the development
of transvaginal high-resolution US probes, they were readily
adopted for follicular monitoring and oocyte pickup. Consequently, by 1990 the laparoscopic approach for oocyte recovery had been largely replaced by US-guided techniques.
Consideration of ovarian morphometrics ﬁrst began for
women with Stein-Leventhal syndrome. Enlarged ovaries
with multiple small peripheral follicles of 5–8 mm were
considered the classic US picture of the polycystic ovary.
Later, as US measurements of the ovaries became quick, accurate, and cost effective, ovarian volume became the ﬁrst signiﬁcant predictor of ovarian reserve and response to
superovulation (371).
The ovary contains three distinct populations of developing follicles: primordial follicles, early growing follicles,
and antral follicles (Fig. 21). A small proportion of early
growing follicles develops into antral follicles larger than 2
mm. These are highly responsive to FSH and can be readily
visualized using transvaginal US.
Early in the evolution of AFC as a marker of ovarian
reserve, it was shown to have the closest association with
the chronologic age of normal women with proven fertility

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
253
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
and could detect age-related decreases in follicle counts (372).
The model of AFC declining with age in a biphasic pattern
corroborated the decline of primordial follicles observed in autopsy studies. Following this initial report, Tomas et al. (373)
and Chang et al. (374) introduced AFC by vaginal US, employing a measurement of 2–5 mm. They showed it to be a promising tool for evaluation of ovarian responsiveness to
gonadotropin stimulation in IVF. Subsequently, most reports
on AFC employed a 2–10 mm range without consistent decline
in its predictive performance. Early comparative prospective
studies demonstrated the superiority of AFC over ovarian volume and endocrine biomarkers to predict poor ovarian
response as well as hyper-response in IVF programs (373).
When the intercycle variation of AFC was examined,
cycle-to-cycle measurements revealed only moderate agreement in any range of counts. The difference in AFC between
cycles was explained by the variable size of the growing
follicle cohort among separate cycles. In addition, it was
demonstrated that AFC tended to overestimate the number
of FSH-responsive follicles and collected eggs because it
invariably also measured atretic follicles of the same size
(375).
Greater intercycle variability in AFC was detected in overweight and obese women, limiting its predictive value in this
growing subpopulation (367). In two meta-analyses and a systematic review of AFC, the estimated receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves showed AFC to perform well (area
under the curve [AUC] 0.76; speciﬁcity 73% to 97%) in the prediction of poor ovarian response (<3–4 oocytes or cycle
cancelation), and to be more accurate than basal FSH and
ovarian volume. Yet the prediction of failure to conceive was
poor in meta-analyses for AFC, basal FSH, and ovarian volume. Furthermore, AFC was shown to be predictive of ovarian
response to gonadotropins and oocytes retrieved, but it did not
predict implantation rate, pregnancy rate, or live-birth rate.
In 2010, a group of experts led by Broekmans (375) published simple, practical recommendations for standardizing
the assessment of AFC. The group focused on establishing
the basic clinical and technical requirements for its evaluation. The clinical setting included selection of patients with
regular menstrual cycles and with no coexisting pathologic
condition that could technically affect the counting of follicles; counting of follicles between days 2 and 4 of a spontaneous menstrual cycle or an oral contraceptive cycle to
avoid the effect of intracycle variation; and inclusion of all
antral follicles of 2–10 mm in diameter.
Presently, AFC is an easy-to-perform, noninvasive
approach that immediately provides essential predictive information on ovarian responsiveness. With acceptable intercycle
and interoperator reliability, AFC has become an established
biomarker of ovarian reserve. It is a readily available bedside
tool and is the ﬁrst choice in patient assessment before IVF,
as well as an excellent tool in predicting ovarian hyperresponse. Very low AFC is not predictive of failure to conceive.

€ llerian hormone
Antimu
Two transforming growth factor-b superfamily members,
inhibin-B and AMH, are secreted exclusively from ovarian

granulosa cells in response to FSH stimulation: AMH by primary and secondary preantral (but not primordial) and small
antral follicles (up to 5-6 mm), and inhibin-B primarily by
more differentiated preantral and small and medium sized
antral follicles up to 12–14 mm (see Fig. 21).
Women with decreased ovarian response have fewer preantral and small antral follicles, and thus reduced inhibin-B
secretion. In 1997 Seifer and colleagues showed that women
with low early follicular serum inhibin-B concentrations
had poor ovarian response and were less likely to conceive after IVF treatment (364). However, inhibin-B levels exhibit
high intercycle variability; many studies have shown that it
is not a reliable marker of ovarian response or of pregnancy
success through IVF.
A well-known stimulator of m€
ullerian duct regression in
the male fetus, AMH was ﬁrst found in follicular ﬂuid by Seifer et al. (376) in 1993. It inhibits the transition from primordial to primary follicles and decreases FSH-induced follicle
selection and aromatase activity. In 2002, van Rooij et al.
(377) ﬁrst suggested AMH could serve as a marker of ovarian
reserve. Its serum levels positively correlate with histologically determined primordial follicle number and negatively
correlate with chronologic age (378). Additionally, AMH
plays an important role in the pathogenesis of PCOS. Because
AMH is secreted from the earliest differentiated follicles, its
measurement is closest to the primordial follicle phase, thus
providing the most direct assessment of ovarian reserve (see
Fig. 21). Furthermore, AMH secretion is FSH-independent,
remains relatively consistent within and between menstrual
cycles, and can be measured throughout the menstrual cycle.
Some external factors—such as oral contraception, GnRH analogues, smoking, or obesity—may temporarily decrease
serum AMH levels (378, 379).
Early studies found that AMH levels were associated with
ovarian response, embryo quality, and pregnancy outcomes
in IVF. Later meta-analyses of individual patient data, of
5,705 and 4,786 women from 28 studies and 32 databases,
respectively, demonstrated that AMH was an excellent predictor of poor ovarian response as well as excessive response
(380, 381). AMH or AFC clearly add to patient age in
predicting poor response (AUC 0.78 and 0.76, respectively).
Predicting excessive response using a model with AFC and
AMH, with or without patient age, had an AUC of 0.85.
Although both tests appear to have clinical value, four
prospective multicenter trials consistently showed AMH to
be better at predicting oocyte number as well as poor
response and over-response as compared with AFC (382).
The AMH cutoffs used for determining sensitivity and speciﬁcity are between 0.1 and 1.66 ng/ml for poor response, and
3.4 and 5.0 ng/ml for hyperstimulation. According to metaanalyses, AMH cannot accurately predict pregnancy (378).
The consistency of the results supports the notion that AMH
represents oocyte quantity but not quality, and pregnancy
rates depend on many other factors.
The ﬁndings from these studies opened the way to explore
the potential of individualized FSH dose regimens based on
ORT. In a recent multicenter randomized controlled trial, Nyboe et al. (383) showed that optimizing ovarian response in
IVF by individualized dosing according to pretreatment

254
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
patient characteristics (serum AMH and body weight)
improved safety and resulted in similar efﬁcacy compared
with conventional ovarian stimulation.
The main limitation of AMH is its assay methods (378,
382). Initially AMH was assayed by two different enzymelinked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) kits and later by
second-generation ELISAs. Due to dissimilarity in the antibodies and assay sensitivities, in addition to interlaboratory
variations, a considerable difference was found between the
different assays, particularly for low AMH values, complicating interpretation of the AMH values and their clinical
implications. The highly sensitive, fully automated AMH
assays that have been available since 2014 have replaced
the older ELISA assays, thereby both providing faster results
and improving interobserver reliability (382). However,
no reliable converting factor has been identiﬁed, and
no international assay standardizations have been agreed
upon. Therefore, the cut points developed and reported
for one commercial AMH assay are not generalizable to
others.
At present, AMH is considered the earliest, most sensitive
ORT. Objectivity and the convenience of testing at any time
throughout the menstrual cycle make AMH concentration
the gold standard ovarian reserve biomarker and the most
reliable predictor of ovarian response in IVF. Development
of an international standard of AMH level is necessary for
future clinical use.

Conclusion
Ovarian reserve tests have three main goals: counseling IVF
patients based on ovarian response prediction and the probability of live birth; employing predicted ovarian response to
optimize ovarian stimulation and minimize safety risks; and
assessing current and future fertility potential to allow
women to decide when and how to proceed with family
planning, fertility treatment, or fertility preservation. Both
AFC and AMH clearly have an added value together with female age and basal FSH for predicting poor (380) and excessive (381) ovarian response in IVF. Antim€
ullerian hormone,
recognized as the best biomarker of ovarian reserve, has the
advantage of being cycle-stage independent.
Because ORTs reﬂect oocyte quantity but not quality, no
ORT can accurately predict the probability of pregnancy.
Young women with decreased ovarian response have a small
number of high-quality oocytes but reasonable pregnancy
rates. Thus, it is important to emphasize that an ORT should
not be the sole criterion used to deny patients access to
fertility treatments (384). Evidence of decreased ovarian
response in all age groups does not necessarily correlate
with an inability to conceive. Whether ORT can predict the
speciﬁc stages of ovarian aging and timing of menopause is
still a matter of debate.
We may be approaching a time when the value of these
markers should be reevaluated. The shift from long GnRHagonist to short GnRH-antagonist protocols combined with
GnRH-agonist trigger and a freeze-all policy have diminished
the importance of using markers to predict ovarian response
and prevent OHSS.

THE DEVELOPMENT AND
EVOLUTION OF GONADOTROPINS
IN ASSISTED REPRODUCTION
TECHNOLOGY
Bruno Lunenfeld, M.D., Ph.D.
Diego Ezcurra, D.V.M., M.Sc., and
Thomas D’Hooghe, M.D., Ph.D.
DISCOVERY OF GONADOTROPINS
The link between the gonads and the pituitary was established in the 1920s through animal experiments that
involved removal of the hypophysis leading to gonadal atrophy, which in turn could be reversed with pituitary implants
(385). The link was further demonstrated by implantation of
anterior pituitary glands in immature animals, which resulted in precocious sexual maturation (385). In 1929, Zondek proposed the existence of two different products secreted
by the pituitary gland, which he named prolan A and prolan
B, both of which stimulated the gonads (386, 387). He
proposed that follicular growth was stimulated by prolan A
and that ‘‘foliculin’’ secretion was stimulated by both
prolan A and prolan B (386, 387). Furthermore, prolan B
was proposed to induce ovulation, corpus luteum
formation, and lutein and foliculin secretion. These two
hormones were described as gonadotropins (reﬂecting their
effect on the gonads), and were subsequently renamed
according to their speciﬁc actions: prolan A was called
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and prolan B was called
luteinizing hormone (LH).

HUMAN CHORIONIC GONADOTROPIN:
DISCOVERY AND PLACENTAL/URINARY
EXTRACTION
In 1927, Ascheim and Zondek demonstrated that the blood
and urine of pregnant women contained a gonadstimulating substance, which was believed to have originated in the pituitary (385). This discovery led to the
Ascheim–Zondek pregnancy test, in which a woman’s
urine was injected into an immature female mouse; if
the woman was pregnant, the ovaries would enlarge
(two to three times normal size) with red dots visible
(due to hemorrhage into the follicles), or luteinization
would occur and corpora lutea would be visible despite
the mouse’s immaturity (385). Studying in vitro cultures
of the chorionic villi, Seegar Jones and colleagues subsequently concluded that the placenta rather than the pituitary was responsible for the secretion of the hormone
(386). Consequently, the material was named human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG).
In 1931, Organon released an hCG extract for use in
humans (originally named Pregnon, and renamed Pregnyl
in 1932) (386). However, reproducibility with this product
was limited, partly due to the use of animal units to measure its bioactivity (385). One ‘‘rat’’ unit was deﬁned as the

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
255
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
amount of the hCG preparation required to produce vaginal
opening and estrus when injected into immature female
rats (385). The international standard for hCG, the ﬁrst
for a gonadotropin, was introduced in 1939 by the League
of Nations (385), wherein 1 IU of hCG was deﬁned as the
activity contained in 0.1 mg of the reference hCG preparation (386). Subsequently, in 1940 puriﬁed urinary preparations of hCG became available, with a bioactivity up to
8,500 IU/mL, extracted from urine collected during the ﬁrst
half of pregnancy in women (385). During infertility treatment hCG is used to induce ﬁnal follicular maturation and
ovulation as well as to support the luteal phase; in addition,
hCG can be used to treat male hypogonadism because it
stimulates the Leydig cells to produce testosterone.

HUMAN CLINICAL USE OF ANIMAL
GONADOTROPIN EXTRACTS
The studies demonstrating the physiologic action of the gonadotropins suggested that gonadotropin extracts may be
of use for the treatment of infertile patients with gonadotropin insufﬁciency (385). The ﬁrst extract, which became
available in 1930, was derived from swine pituitaries. Later,
preparations from hog and sheep pituitaries and from the
serum of pregnant mares—pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (PMSG)—became available. These extracts were effective in women for increasing urinary estrogen secretion,
resulting in enlarged cystic ovaries (386). This led in 1941
to the introduction of the ‘‘two-step protocol’’ by Mazer
and Ravetz that involved ovarian stimulation using animal
gonadotropins (PMSG, or hog or sheep pituitary gonadotropin) to stimulate follicular growth and development,
followed by the induction of ovulation using hCG (385, 386,
388).
However, it was observed that the ovarian response was
maintained for only a short period of time, gradually weakening before disappearing altogether (385). In 1942, monographs by Ostergaard, and Zondek and Sulman claimed that
this decreased responsiveness was due to the production of
‘‘anti-hormones’’ (antibodies) to animal gonadotropins
(385). In 1948, Leathem and Rakoff asserted that antihormone
production rendered nonprimate gonadotropins of limited
clinical use (385). The development of antihormones was
conﬁrmed by Maddock in 1956, who detected them between
days 44 and 76 after prolonged treatment with animal FSH
preparations (386).

HUMAN PITUITARY GONADOTROPIN
Because nonprimate gonadotropins were of limited clinical
use, Gemzell originally extracted gonadotropins from
cadaveric human pituitaries in 1958; in the same year, reports of successful follicle stimulation after administration
of an hCG preparation to induce ovulation induction were
released (386). In 1963, Bettendorf demonstrated that
ovarian stimulation with human pituitary gonadotropin
(hPG) was possible in hypophysectomized individuals,
and between 1958 and 1988 hPG preparations were successfully used for ovulation induction (386). However,
the production of hPG required human pituitaries from

cadavers, and their limited supply could not cover the
growing demand for gonadotropin preparations (386). In
addition, more than 20 years after its introduction, fatal
cases of iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease were linked
to the use of hPG and human pituitary growth hormone
in the United Kingdom, France, and Australia (386), where
all the affected individuals had received products produced
by government agencies; hPG was subsequently withdrawn from the market (386).

HUMAN MENOPAUSAL GONADOTROPIN
In 1954, Borth et al. (389) discovered that postmenopausal
urine contained increased FSH and LH that could be extracted, although the extracts needed to be lyophilized for
storage to prevent oxidization. Injecting this product into female hypophysectomized infantile rats resulted in a linear increase in ovarian and uterine weights. Injection into male
hypophysectomized infantile rats induced stimulation of Leydig cells to produce testosterone, resulting in a linear increase
in ventral prostate weight (385, 386). Subsequently the
therapeutic use of human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG)
in humans was suggested in 1957 (385, 386).
The ﬁrst hMG preparation (Pergonal 25) was registered
for clinical use by Serono in Italy in 1950, but no clinical
results were reported in the medical literature. Later preparations beneﬁted from improvements in puriﬁcation technology, and the proportions of LH and FSH were
standardized (Pergonal 75 contained 75 IU FSH and 75 IU
LH, measured using in vivo assays). However, these products still contained other unwanted urinary proteins (390).
Moreover, a large, volume of source material was required
in the production process (about 3.5 L of urine were
required to produce one ampule of Pergonal 75 (Serono internal data).
At the time the ﬁrst hMG preparations were registered,
‘‘animal’’ units (mouse or rat) were used to deﬁne their
bioactivity (386). One ‘‘rat’’ unit was the amount of the
preparation required to induce estrus in 28-day-old prepubertal female rats, and this unit varied according to the
strain of rat used. Mouse units were deﬁned in a similar
manner (386). However, as with hCG, the lack of a deﬁned
international unit meant that clinical trials could not be
started.
In the 1950s, batches of menopausal urine kaolin
extract (hMG 20, hMG 20a, and hMG 24) were provided
by Organon Newhouse for use as reference products to
standardize preparations and assay methods (386). The
availability of a reference product also enabled the study
of the day-to-day variation of gonadotropins and steroid
secretion during a normal menstrual cycle with the aim of
learning to imitate the pattern for use in future clinical trials (Fig. 22) (385, 386).
By 1959, most of the reference product had been used up,
and further batches from the same source could not be provided (386). Therefore, in 1959, Pietro Donini from Serono
donated 50 g of Pergonal 23 to be used as the reference product (386). Each ampule of this reference preparation contained
5 mg of hMG, equivalent to 40 IU of FSH and 40 IU of LH

256
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 22

Schematic ﬁgures showing the (A) levels of pituitary and ovarian hormones during the menstrual cycle (394), (B) follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
isoform secretion during the menstrual cycle (404), (C) ovulation and oocyte fertilization up to implantation, and (D) hormone pattern during
follicular phase, ovulation, luteal phase, and pregnancy after stimulation with human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG) of a primary
amenorrheic patient with hypopituitary hypogonadism which led to the ﬁrst pregnancy using hMG for ovulation stimulation. (*The starting
dose was 240 mg of IRP-hMG [corresponding to 150 IU], and this was increased to 360 mg [225 IU], then to 480 mg IRP-hMG [300 IU], before
being gradually reduced to 360 mg [225 IU] and 240 mg [150 IU] IRP-hMG. Ovulation was induced with 10,000 IU of hCG followed by 10,000
€llerian hormone; BL, blastocyst; CT, cytotrophoblast; FSH, follicle-stimulating
and 5,000 IU of hCG on consecutive days.) AMH, antimu
hormone; GE, glandular epithelium; h, hours; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; IL-1, interleukin-1; IU, international units; LH, luteinizing
hormone; LIF, leukocyte inhibitory factor; P, pinopode; sgf130, soluble gp 130; ST, syncytiotrophoblast; Temp, temperature; ZP, zonapelucida.
[1C: Includes data from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK29/#A1223. 1D: Adapted from B. Lunenfeld, Treatment of anovulation by
human gonadotrophins, J Int Fedn Gynecol Obstet 1963;1:153.]
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
257
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 22 Continued

Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

(386). This material became the International Reference Preparation (IRP), and in 1964 became the international standard
for FSH and LH for the quantitation of hMG (386). This
enabled determination of the relative gonadotropin content
of a preparation, allowing more precise and repeatable
dosing.

Clinical trials using hMG preparations were initiated,
with the preparations being accepted by both the scientiﬁc
community and regulatory agencies despite their low purity,
as no other alternatives were available (385). In 1960, use
of hMG in anovulatory, hypopituitary, hypogonadotropic,
primary amenorrheic women was demonstrated to induce

258
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 22 Continued

Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

the expected, desirable changes in the endometrium and the
vaginal epithelium as well as to induce steroid secretion
(385). Then, in 1962, Lunenfeld et al. (391) observed that
amenorrheic hypogonadotropic women required 120–240
mg equivalent of the IRP to stimulate their ovaries to produce estrogens (385). Based on the hMG content of the
IRP (120 mg IRP ¼ 6.8 mg hMG), this would be 6.8–13.6
mg of hMG (392). This was followed by the ﬁrst report of
hMG being used for successful ovulation stimulation followed by pregnancy in amenorrheic, hypogonadotropic
women, by use of a sequential step-up/step-down regimen
(385). The hormone pattern during the follicular phase,
ovulation, luteal phase, and pregnancy are shown in
Figure 21D.
After successful ovulation induction and pregnancies
were demonstrated in hypopituitary hypogonadic amenorrheic women, Pergonal 75 was registered by Serono in Israel
in 1963 and in Italy in 1965 (386). A similar preparation,
Humegon, was marketed by Organon in the Netherlands in
1963 (385).
In 1973, the ﬁrst World Health Organization (WHO)
guidelines on the diagnosis and management of infertile

couples were developed (385). These recommended an
effective daily dose of 150–225 IU hMG for hypogonadotropic patients (WHO Group I), and 75–150 IU for anovulatory normogonadotropic patients (WHO Group II). These
guidelines also noted that the FSH/LH ratio varied in the
different hMG and hPG preparations, and that available evidence suggested preparations with ratios of 0.1–10.0 were
acceptable, provided a sufﬁcient FSH dose was given (385,
386). Currently, for gonadotropins, a variability of 20% to
25% is accepted in the pharmacopeia (i.e., a 75-IU vial of
hMG may contain 80% to 125% content of FSH and/or
LH) (393).
In 1981, following the pioneering work of Steptoe and
Edwards using natural cycles for IVF, Howard and Georgeanna Jones established the hMG/hCG protocols that had
been described by Lunenfeld et al. in 1963 as the standard
approach for ovulation stimulation and induction for assisted
reproduction technologies (ART) (385). These protocols were
later revised, with the standard for ovarian stimulation in
ART treatment changing from monofollicular development
to the production of multiple follicles (385). Frequent cycle
cancellations were associated with these protocols as a result

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
259
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
of a premature LH surge and premature follicular luteinization (385). This was overcome by the use of GnRH agonists
to down-regulate the pituitary during ovarian stimulation
with hMG (385).
Highly puriﬁed urinary hMG (HP-hMG) (Menopur, Ferring Pharmaceuticals) received marketing approval in Europe
in 2004 and is extracted from menopausal urine via eight puriﬁcation steps (394). However, this increased purity also results in a loss of LH activity, and hCG is added to
reestablish the FSH/LH ratio. As a result of this, HP-hMG contains approximately 30% identiﬁed impurities that vary from
batch to batch. In addition, LH and hCG are different from
molecular, functional, and clinical points of view (395). Unlike LH, hCG is only produced by pregnant women, and
when used in nonpregnant women it has a longer half-life, resulting in accumulation in peripheral blood. In addition, hCG
has a very different effect on granulosa cells than LH, downregulating the LH receptor; it is more potent on cAMP production and less potent on extracellular-regulated kinase and
protein kinase B (395).

PURIFICATION OF FSH FROM hMG
Despite the availability of hMG preparations, clinicians
wanted to be able to individualize the dosing of FSH and LH
according to speciﬁc patient characteristics (385). A number
of methods were proposed to purify FSH from hMG (386),
but none of these methods could realistically be used on a large
scale; it was not until developments in immunological techniques enabled the preparation of speciﬁc antibodies to FSH
or LH that puriﬁcation on a large scale became feasible (385).
Initially, in 1960, polyclonal anti-hCG antibodies were
generated and used to produce an afﬁnity column to remove
LH activity from hMG (385). The eluted FSH could then be
further puriﬁed and lyophilized as with earlier hMG preparations (385). This produced a product (Metrodin, urofollitropin)
that contained 150 IU of FSH and 1 IU of LH per mg of protein
(385). However, a large proportion of the nongonadotropin
urinary proteins remained present (385).
Further advances enabled the replacement of the polyclonal antibodies with highly speciﬁc monoclonal antibodies
to FSH (385). In these techniques, hMG passed through an afﬁnity column containing the monoclonal antibodies, which
would bind selectively to the FSH molecules; all unbound urinary proteins and LH passed through the column and were
removed (386). The FSH could be extracted from the column,
providing highly puriﬁed FSH with very minimal LH or other
contaminating proteins (386). The ﬁnal product (Metrodin
HP; highly puriﬁed urofollitropin) contained <0.1 IU of LH
activity and <5% of unidentiﬁed urinary proteins and had
about 9,000 IU of FSH per mg of protein (386). The FSH content per mg was 60 times greater with Metrodin-HP compared
with Metrodin, and the proportion of nongonadotropin urinary proteins was signiﬁcantly lower. This improvement
meant that the product could be injected subcutaneously
rather than intramuscularly as had been the case for all previous gonadotropin preparations.
As the demand for gonadotropins increased, the shortcomings of sourcing menopausal urine became more apparent

(385). In the year 2000, 120,000,000 L of urine from 600,000
donors were needed to satisfy the demand, and increasing
safety measures had to be put in place as each woman could
not be evaluated individually (385). After Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease had been reported in women who had received hPG
treatment, prion proteins were identiﬁed in the urine of
affected individuals (385). Concern about the potential for
similar disease transmission with hMG led to countries publishing resolutions to replace urinary with recombinant gonadotropins, owing to their higher purity and safety (385).

RECOMBINANT GONADOTROPINS
Recombinant human FSH (recombinant hFSH) was developed
to reduce the inherent variability that resulted from the inconsistent starting materials of urinary FSH production, and to
make FSH production independent of urine collection, thus
ensuring greater availability. Because glycosylation is very
important to the function of FSH, the recombinant molecules
must be produced using mammalian cell lines capable of this
post-translational modiﬁcation (385). Hence, recombinant
hFSH was ﬁrst expressed in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
cells, an industry standard for the production of biologics at
that time (Fig. 23A) (386).
During the development of recombinant hFSH, clones
were selected based on activity, consistency of production,
and the glycosylation pattern (386). It was important that stable cell lines that expressed the product in relative abundance
were used for efﬁciency and to avoid changes in the product
over time (386). The glycosylation pattern of gonadotropins
varies throughout the menstrual cycle (see Fig. 22B), and
the desired glycosylation proﬁle of the recombinant hFSH
also had to be selected (386). After considering the feasibility
of producing three FSH preparations with different glycan
proﬁles, matching the glycosylation at the start, middle, and
end points of the menstrual cycle, the decision was made to
use the midcycle glycosylation pattern, as it was the most
bioactive.
The resulting recombinant hFSH is pure (99%) and has a
more homogenous glycosylation pattern than highly puriﬁed
urinary and pituitary FSH or hMG preparations, and the
manufacturing process allows high batch-to-batch consistency in both isoform proﬁle and glycan-species distribution
(386). This higher purity permits bioactivity to be determined
using physicochemical analysis and vials to be ﬁlled by protein mass rather than speciﬁc activity, which reduces batchto-batch variation to 2%. Furthermore, the greater purity
of the formulation reduces the possibility of oxidation,
thereby enabling the production of liquid gonadotropin formulations. These liquid formulations could then be used in
preﬁlled pen-injection devices.
To determine the bioactivity of the ﬁlled-by-mass product, a conversion factor between international units of biological activity based on the Steelman–Pohley bioassay and
micrograms had to be obtained. The Steelman–Pohley
bioassay determines the FSH activity in a gonadotropin sample by comparing ovarian weight in immature rats (six to
eight per group) treated for 3 days with a daily injection of
either the test FSH preparation plus hCG or a standard FSH

260
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 23

(A) The development and production of recombinant products in dihydrofolate deﬁcient Chinese hamster ovary cells and (B) time line of
gonadotropin development. dhfr, dihydrofolate reductase; FbM, ﬁlled-by-mass; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; hCG, human chorionic
gonadotropin; HP, highly puriﬁed; MTX, methotrexate; PMSG, pregnant mare serum gonadotropin; Q.C., quality control; r-hFSH, recombinant
human follicle-stimulating hormone; T.C., tissue culture; u-hFSH, urinary follicle-stimulating hormone; uhMG, urinary human menopausal
gonadotropin. [1A: Adapted from B. Lunenfeld, Gonadotropin stimulation: past, present and future, Reprod Med Biol 2012;11:11–25;
1B: Adapted from B. Lunenfeld, Historical perspectives in gonadotrophin therapy, Hum Reprod Update 2004;10:453–67.]
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
261
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
preparation plus hCG (396). Potency ratios are then calculated
based on dose–response curves for the test and standard FSH
preparations, enabling the biopotency of the test preparation
to be determined. This took 2 years for the production, analysis, and clinical validation of different batches of follitropin
alfa (385). This work determined that recombinant hFSH has a
bioactivity of 13,745 IU/mg of protein, which leads to a conversion factor of 75 IU per 5.5 mg of FSH.
The ﬁrst recombinant hFSH (follitropin alfa) for clinical
use was produced by Serono Laboratories (now Merck
KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) in 1988 and was licensed for
marketing in the European Union in 1995, and a similar recombinant hFSH (follitropin beta) produced by Organon
(now Merck & Co., Kenilworth, NJ) received its license for
marketing in 1996 (385). These two products are similar but
have biochemical differences resulting from their production
(386). Follitropin alfa is produced using two separate plasmids
to construct the FSH-producing cell line, one for the a-subunit and one for the b-subunit (386); follitropin beta is produced using a single plasmid encoding both the a-subunit
and the b-subunit (386). In addition, the downstream puriﬁcation processes differ for the two products: follitropin
beta is puriﬁed using ion exchange chromatography, hydrophobic chromatography, and size exclusion chromatography
whereas follitropin alfa is puriﬁed using these processes plus
an additional immunoafﬁnity step (386). During the early
1990s recombinant preparations were shown to be at least
as efﬁcient for ART as urinary preparations when pregnancies
from fresh transfers were compared (386).
After the successful production of recombinant hFSH, a
similar process was used to produce recombinant human versions of LH (recombinant hLH) and hCG (recombinant hCG)
(386). In 1997, Agarwal et al. reported the ﬁrst birth in a
hypopituitary–hypogonadotropic (WHO Group 1) woman
treated with recombinant hFSH and recombinant hLH to
stimulate follicular growth and recombinant hCG to induce
ovulation (386). An estimated 100 million units of gonadotropin was used in 2016, and this amount is estimated to
continue to increase by 6% each year until 2025 (data based
on IMS MIDAS data of IQVIA).
Two biosimilar versions of recombinant hFSH are now
available. Ovaleap (Teva B.V., Haarlem, the Netherlands)
received marketing authorization in Europe in 2013, and
Bemfola (Afolia, Finox Biotech AG, Balzers, Liechtenstein)
received marketing authorization in Europe in 2015. Biosimilars are not exact copies and are not considered generic
versions of the reference product. Differences result from
the manufacturing processes, which are not identical for
each product. Biochemical differences from the originator
product (strength, purity, and differences in the composition
of isoforms and/or glycosylation proﬁles) can cause differences in biological activity (including biopotency, receptor
binding, postreceptor biochemistry in the cell, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics). Phase III trials for both
Bemfola (Afolia) (397, 398) and Ovaleap (399) consistently
observed a tendency toward a lower ongoing pregnancy
rate per cycle with the biosimilar preparations compared
with GONAL-f, highlighting that more data are needed
regarding efﬁcacy.

In December 2016, a new recombinant FSH, follitropin
delta (Rekovelle, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Saint Prex,
Switzerland) produced using a human retina-derived cell
(PER.C6 cell line), received marketing authorization in Europe. The peptide structure is the same as the other recombinant FSH preparations, but the glycan structure is different
(including both a2,3 sialylation and a2,6 sialylation), with
higher sialylation than follitropin alfa. This results in differences in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, which
causes higher exposure and lower serum clearance compared
with follitropin alfa (400). Because comparison of the bioactivity of follitropin delta with the bioactivity of a reference
standard determined by the Steelman–Pohley assay cannot
directly predict the proportional pharmacodynamic activity
of follitropin delta in women (400), it has to be dosed according to mass (mg) rather than bioactivity, and the starting dose
has to be calculated according to patient’s antim€
ullerian hormone level and weight (401). Once treatment has been initiated, dose adjustments are not allowed with follitropin
delta, unlike with other follitropin preparations.

LONG-ACTING GONADOTROPIN PRODUCTS
Follicle-stimulating hormone has a relatively short biological
half-life (24 hours), and daily injections are required over a
number of days during fertility treatment. There has therefore
been interest in producing longer-acting versions of the product that would reduce the treatment burden. One early
approach was to extend the half-life of FSH in the bloodstream through hyperglycosylation (GM1-Serono). This compound remained in the bloodstream for 5 days; however,
development of this product was discontinued, despite
achieving the same results as follitropin alfa in clinical trials
(402). A different approach was used for the development of
corifollitropin alfa (Elonva, Merck & Co.), which has a modiﬁed b-subunit fused with the CTP component of the hCG bsubunit, which reduces its metabolism and enables it to
remain in the bloodstream for 7 days. This product received
marketing authorization in Europe in 2010, and no evidence
has been observed of a difference in live-birth rates for medium doses (150–180 mg) compared with daily FSH treatment
(403).

CONCLUSION
The development of gonadotropins has been a process
focused on producing purer products that are safer and
more efﬁcacious (see Fig. 23B). It is estimated that their use
in ovulation induction and ART has led to the birth of more
than 15 million children. The currently available products
can be injected subcutaneously rather than intramuscularly,
and pen injection devices are available, eliminating the
need to reconstitute the product before injection and
improving ease-of-use compared with syringe and vial. This
has led to the current state of the art, where fertility treatment
can be personalized using pure gonadotropin preparations
(recombinant hFSH, recombinant hLH, and recombinant
hCG) at the start of and during ovarian stimulation with the
aim of maximizing safety and efﬁcacy. However, work to

262
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
develop new preparations is still ongoing. There has been a lot
of interest in developing orally active FSH agonists and antagonists as FSH itself cannot be absorbed orally, although
to date all the efforts have failed (386).

FIGURE 24

Acknowledgments: The authors thank all the scientists and
physicians who have contributed to this endeavor (owing to
space restrictions we were unable to cite many of the important manuscripts that informed the development of gonadotropins for use in ART treatment); and Alexander Jones of
inScience Communications, who provided medical writing
support, funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany.

PROGRESS IN OVARIAN
STIMULATION FOR IVF OVER TIME
Bart C. J. M. Fauser, M.D., Ph.D. and
Basil C. Tarlatzis, M.D., Ph.D.
Despite the notion that the ﬁrst baby Louise Brown was born
in 1978 following IVF performed in the natural menstrual cycle without exogenous stimulation, soon thereafter ovarian
stimulation became standard of care in clinical IVF. It is
generally believed that starting the laboratory phase of IVF
with multiple oocytes retrieved following ovarian stimulation
effectively compensates for suboptimal fertilization of oocytes and the development of embryos in vitro and is therefore mandatory for a successful IVF program.

Historical perspective of ovarian stimulation
In the early 1980s, births after IVF in clomiphene citratestimulated IVF cycles were reported from Australia, followed
by the use of urinary gonadotropins after multiple failed natural cycle IVF attempts in the U.S. (405). Associated with the
ongoing development of multiple follicles and the coinciding
supraphysiological production of estradiol (E2), a premature
late follicular phase rise in luteinizing hormone (LH) and progesterone (P) frequently occurred, resulting in compromised
IVF outcomes. For this reason, down regulation of endogenous gonadotropin synthesis resulting from the coadministration of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
agonists was introduced in the late 1980s and rapidly became
standard of care. The timed induction of ﬁnal oocyte maturation during the late follicular phase and before the retrieval of
oocytes was induced by administering a single bolus dose of
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG).
The duration of stimulation protocols increased signiﬁcantly because stimulation had to be postponed due to the
initial stimulatory (so called ‘‘ﬂare’’) effect of GnRH agonists
on pituitary gonadotropin release. Over the last several years,
clinicians slowly shifted from GnRH agonists co-treatment
towards the more recently introduced GnRH antagonists.
Due to competitive binding to the GnRH receptor, suppressive
effects of GnRH antagonists are immediate. Therefore,
ovarian stimulation can be initiated early during the normal
menstrual cycle, rendering stimulation shorter and more patient friendly. After many years of controversy, the most

The many different variables relevant to ovarian stimulation for IVF.
Adapted from Farquhar et al., 2017 (407).
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

recently updated meta-analysis including all randomized
controlled trials to date comparing GnRH agonist versus
antagonist co-treatment, revealed similar IVF success rates
coinciding with lower overall consumption of gonadotropins
and reduced ovarian hyperstimulation (OHSS) rates (406).
Ovarian stimulation protocols may be preceded by interventions such as estrogens, combined steroid contraceptives
or long-term down regulation by GnRH agonists for reasons
of timing and convenience for the clinic creating the possibility to plan IVF cycles, to ‘‘synchronize’’ the cohort of ovarian
follicles or suppress benign steroid dependent diseases which
may interfere with IVF outcomes, such as endometriosis
(Fig. 24) (407).
The luteal phase is distinctly abnormal following ovarian
stimulation. This was already reported by Professor Bob Edwards in the 1970s when he was initially aiming to develop
IVF using clomiphene citrate stimulation. Although luteal
phase supplementation (predominantly by daily progesterone
administration) is widely applied, the true reason underlying
abnormal luteal function remains insufﬁciently understood.
Many different features may cause insufﬁcient endogenous
support of corpora lutea by pituitary gonadotropins, such as
the follicular phase GnRH agonist coadministration, pharmacological follicular phase E2 concentrations, the bolus dose of
hCG to induce ﬁnal oocyte maturation, follicular puncture
and disruption of the follicular integrity, and ﬁnally markedly
increased early luteal phase P concentration produced by
multiple corpora lutea. Different drugs and medication regimens for luteal phase supplementation have been developed
over the years (Table 9).
Initially, ovarian stimulation was predominantly performed using extracts obtained from the urine of postmenopausal women (human menopausal gonadotropin [HMG])
with both follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and LH bioactivity. In more recent years, next to puriﬁed urinary products,
recombinant DNA technology allowed for the mass production of human recombinant FSH, a long acting FSH chimera,

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
263
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

TABLE 9
Summary of key questions related to ovarian stimulation for IVF.
Issue
Aim of ovarian stimulation
Drawbacks ovarian stimulation

What is the optimal number of oocytes retrieved?
Drug classes used for ovarian stimulation

Can stimulation dosing/ compounds be
individualized?

Do effective intervention for women with low
response exist?
Stimulation pretreatment
Monitoring ovarian stimulation
Luteal phase supplementation

More detailed discussion
Retrieve multiple oocytes for IVF, resulting in:
More embryos for transfer and cryopreservation
Increased pregnancy rates
Cost/access to IVF care
Complexity/treatment burden
Side effects
Complications (especially ovarian hyperstimulation)
Reduced endometrial receptivity and lower embryo implantation rates
Uncertain effects on embryo quality
Uncertain, this may vary under different clinical circumstances, according
to most, in between 8-15 oocytes. Mild stimulation approaches aim
for lower numbers (3-8 oocytes).
Gonadotropins (follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone,
human chorionic gonadotropin)
Anti-estrogens (clomiphene citrate, tamoxifen)
Aromatase inhibitors (letrozole, others)
Insulin sensitizers (metformin, inositol)
Androgens (testosterone, dihydroepiandosterone, others)
Others (growth hormone, ..)
Several patient characteristics predict ovarian response to exogenous
€llerian hormone and antral follicle
stimulation (especially antimu
count), with the potential to generate algorithms for individualized
dosing. More prospective studies are required to conﬁrm a robust
clinical beneﬁt, using different compounds in diverse populations.
The addition of androgens (and possibly growth hormone) seem to
exhibit clinical beneﬁt.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist down regulation
Estrogens
Combined steroid contraceptives
Monitoring of ovarian function by either ultrasound, hormone assays or
both. Required intensity of monitoring varies with rigor of stimulation.
Progesterone
Progesterone and estrogens
Human chorionic gonadotropin
Micro dose gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist

Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

recombinant LH, and hCG. Numerous different ovarian stimulation regimens have been developed using exogenous gonadotropins combining different preparations, different
starting days of stimulation, different doses in either ﬁxed
or ﬂexible regimens dependent on the ovarian response
observed. Starting doses of FSH may vary from <75 IU/day
up to 600 IU/day!
Oral drugs, such as anti-estrogens, aromatase inhibitors,
insulin sensitizers, androgens, and many others, have been
increasingly used in the context of ovarian stimulation in
recent years, either alone or in combination with exogenous
gonadotropin preparations (Fig. 24, Table 9). Reported clinical
outcomes vary, but stimulation cost are signiﬁcantly reduced.
The optimal number of oocytes to be retrieved remains a
topic of ongoing debate. Many clinicians and embryologist
believe that more oocytes are associated with higher IVF pregnancy rates, also referred to as ‘‘the more, the better’’
approach. A high oocyte yield associated with high pregnancy
rates in IVF is still advocated by some (408, 409), but disputed
by others (410, 411). The aim should be to titrate the
stimulation dose in such a way that the optimal number of
follicles develop. Too few follicles (also referred to as low
response) usually means poor IVF outcome, whereas too
many developing follicles induce a risk for developing the

potentially hazardous OHSS (412). When assessing the
optimal number of oocytes, next to pregnancy rates, other
important features associated with ovarian stimulation
should also be considered such as cost, burden of treatment
and risks. For instance, possible detrimental effects of high
dose ovarian stimulation on perinatal outcomes have
recently been reported (413, 414).
For sure, chances to develop OHSS are directly linked to
the number of developing follicles. Since serious forms of
OHSS often coincides with pregnancy, approaches have
been advocated to segment IVF, separating in time the stimulation phase of IVF from the transfer of embryos. This so
called freeze all strategy only transfers frozen-thawed embryos in subsequent natural or artiﬁcial cycles. Several well
designed and sufﬁciently powered randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are on their way so the jury is still out to deﬁnitively
assess whether OHSS risks can indeed be eradicated without
compromising IVF risks and success.

Ovarian stimulation in women with
low ovarian response
From the early days of ovarian stimulation for IVF it became
apparent that ovulatory women do not respond the same way

264
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
to stimulation. A proportion of women exhibit a reduced
ovarian response, characterized by lower E2 levels and a
low number of retrieved oocytes, which is associated with
signiﬁcantly reduced pregnancy rates. Although this observation has been reported by many investigators, the exact deﬁnition of low ovarian response remained variable among the
different studies (415). To address this issue of heterogeneity,
a consensus expert meeting proposed the Bologna Criteria for
deﬁning poor ovarian response (416), which, although not
perfect, represent an important step forward in homogenizing
this group of patients.
Several interventions have been developed aiming to
improve ovarian response in poor responders undergoing
IVF. However, the available evidence, derived mostly from
retrospective and few prospective studies which used very variable deﬁnitions of low response, indicated very disappointing
results in improving the probability of pregnancy (417). In a
ﬁrst meta-analysis comparing the different interventions reported, the addition of growth hormone (GH) to ovarian stimulation protocols, based on its important role in ovarian
steroidogenesis and follicular development, seemed quite
promising. This was further assessed in a subsequent metaanalysis of six relevant RCTs, involving a total of only 169 patients (415). In this small group of women, the addition of GH
was associated with signiﬁcantly increased live-birth rates
(rate difference þ17%; 95% conﬁdence interval: þ5 to
þ30). These encouraging results, however, should be viewed
with caution since they are based on a very limited number
of patients, whereas the safety of GH use for the patient and
the offspring and the cost of treatment need to be further evaluated. Finally, in several countries the use of GH is tightly
regulated, thus making access to the drug problematic.
Another group of substances that has been hypothesized
to be potentially beneﬁcial in improving poor ovarian
response is androgens or androgen-modulating agents. This
contention is based on several studies showing that androgens
play a critical role in early follicular development and granulosa cell proliferation, increasing the number of preantral and
antral follicles and enhancing ovarian responsiveness to FSH.
Hence, another meta-analysis examined the effect of pretreatment with transdermal testosterone or dihydroepiandosterone, the addition of aromatase inhibitors or recombinant LH
or hCG during ovarian stimulation in poor responders undergoing IVF (418). Two studies involving 163 patients showed
that pretreatment with transdermal testosterone for days
was associated with a signiﬁcant increase in live birth rates
(risk difference þ11%; 95% conﬁdence interval: þ0.3 to
þ22%) in poor responders stimulated for IVF. Moreover, pretreatment with transdermal testosterone, decreased signiﬁcantly the total dose of gonadotropins and the number of
stimulation days required and increased signiﬁcantly the
number of oocytes retrieved. Conversely, no signiﬁcant differences in clinical pregnancy rates were observed in patients
receiving dihydroepiandosterone, aromatase inhibitors, recombinant LH and hCG.
These positive ﬁndings from the meta-analysis concerning transdermal testosterone pretreatment were further tested
in a proper RCT in 48 patients fulﬁlling the Bologna Criteria
(419). Transdermal testosterone was given in the preceding

cycle during extended GnRH agonist down regulation and
was discontinued when FSH stimulation was initiated. No signiﬁcant difference was observed in the duration of FSH stimulation, the number of oocytes retrieved, the fertilization rates
and live birth rates per randomized patient. Hence, the data
from this study, together with another four eligible RCTs,
were included in a meta-analysis not yet published involving
362 patients evaluating testosterone pretreatment either with
transdermal (n¼4) or with oral (n¼1) preparations. These
ﬁndings conﬁrm that testosterone pretreatment is associated
with signiﬁcantly higher clinical pregnancy and live birth
rates, signiﬁcantly lower total dose of gonadotropins and
signiﬁcantly more retrieved oocytes.

Current ovarian stimulation challenges in
perspective
It seems unjustiﬁed to assess the beneﬁts of ovarian stimulation in isolation. For sure pregnancy chances of a single IVF cycle will be higher as compared to natural cycle IVF in case
multiple oocytes resulting from ovarian stimulation are
involved. However, multiple potential drawbacks of ovarian
stimulation cannot be ignored, including; the complexity of regimes and resulting patient compliance issues, exceptionally
high cost of drugs also inducing the need for intense ovarian
response monitoring requiring frequent hospital visits, ultrasound scans often combined with endocrine assessments in
blood, considerable side effects related to the GnRH agonist
induced initial ﬂare and subsequent down regulation along
with high E2 concentrations due to ovarian stimulation, and
ﬁnally and most importantly the risk for developing OHSS,
which is usually reported somewhere between 1-8% depending
on OHSS criteria used and applied stimulation regimen.
More recently, convincing evidence has been provided
that the abnormal endocrine milieu during the follicular phase
also negatively impacts on endometrial receptivity and therefore compromised implantation of embryos transferred in an
IVF cycle. In an attempt to circumvent these negative effects
of ovarian stimulation at the level of the endometrium, the
freeze all strategy has also been advocated where only
frozen-thawed embryos are transferred in subsequent cycles.
Following GnRH antagonist co-treatment during ovarian
stimulation, ﬁnal oocyte maturation at the end of the follicular phase can also be induced by a bolus dose of a GnRH
agonist inducing a relative short endogenous LH (and FSH)
surge, just like in the normal menstrual cycle. Luteal phase
supplementation with low-dose hCG has been advocated,
although such an approach again introduces the risk of developing OHSS (420). The pros and cons of the later approach
should be balanced against the freeze all strategy.
Although not without controversy, some data seem to
suggest that generating a great number of oocytes, may
also give rise to more aneuploidy of embryos generated
(421). The concept that profound ovarian stimulation is a prerequisite for a successful IVF program has been challenged by
some in recent years. When cumulative outcomes are considered involving fresh and frozen transfers of a given IVF cycle,
or even multiple IVF cycles over a given period of time,
similar live-birth rates following mild compared to conventional stimulation have been reported (422). Moreover, a

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
265
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
recent systematic review considering all RCTs involving mild
ovarian stimulation in both normal responders (15 studies
and a total of 3,721 women involved) and low responders (5
RCT, and 1,493 women) revealed comparable pregnancy
rates, reduced cost and reduced OHSS rates (423). These
ongoing efforts aiming to improve the experience of patients
as well as the health economics of IVF will likely contribute to
the more widespread acceptance of mild IVF, both by patients
and health care providers, and hopefully increasing access to
IVF care worldwide.
As mentioned earlier, the individual ovarian response to
stimulation varies signiﬁcantly. Often clinicians are taken
by surprise by individual ovarian response differences to
stimulation and they aim to circumvent unwanted response
by either increasing or decreasing the dose of the drug given.
It should be mentioned, however, that the clinical utility of
such an approach has never been proven. Much effort has
been directed towards the identiﬁcation of features which
might predict ovarian response to standard stimulation,
including female age, early follicular phase serum FSH concentrations, the number of ovarian follicles assessed by transvaginal ultrasound (antral follicle count), and more recently
antim€
ullerian hormone levels exclusively produced by preantral and early antral ovarian follicles. Many retrospective
studies demonstrated convincingly that both antral follicle
count and antim€
ullerian hormone correlate well with ovarian
response to standard stimulation. Such factors predicting
ovarian response of a given woman may aid in selecting the
most appropriate starting dose for stimulation.
Only recently, few prospective RCTs were undertaken
involving individualized dosing for ovarian stimulation based
on prediction models involving initial screening characteristics for ovarian response. A recent systematic review summarized outcomes of these 4 RCTs involving 1,982 women in
total (424). Based on these studies it can be concluded that
the desired oocyte number was more often reached following
individualized dosing, less drugs were being used and chances
for OHSS may be reduced. An even more recent RCT not
included in the systematic review was unable to demonstrate
a clinically relevant difference in cumulative live birth rates.
Clearly, more studies are needed to reﬁne the concept of individualized dosing further, using different algorithms and
different stimulation regimens in diverse populations.
Ovarian stimulation in the context of oncofertility should
be considered separately because the potential effects of the
disease itself or the treatment required on ovarian function,
the need for developing novel and immediate stimulation regimens because often there is no time to postpone chemotherapy, and ﬁnally the need for different approaches and
compounds in steroid dependent cancer such as breast cancer
(425). Moreover, safe and effective ovarian stimulation strategies are being developed for special conditions like oocyte
donation or oocyte freezing for own later use.

Summary of most pressing current challenges
Let us end with a personal account of the most pressing current questions regarding ovarian stimulation for women undergoing IVF today:

Can we agree on the optimal number of oocytes needed
for successful IVF, balancing beneﬁts versus risks?
Should GnRH antagonist cotreatment during ovarian
stimulation for IVF be preferred for all IVF patients based
on simplicity, less use of drugs, lower OHSS rates and
similar IVF success?
Does ovarian stimulation impact negatively on embryo
quality and endometrial receptivity, and if so how can
we circumvent these detrimental effects?
Should hCG for inducing ﬁnal oocyte maturation be replaced by a late follicular phase GnRG agonist bolus?
What is the optimal stimulation regimen, if any, for low
responders?
How can we reach an agreement regarding compounds
and dosing for ovarian stimulation?
Can ovarian stimulation be individualized, and if so what
would be the best way to do this?
Is there a place for mild stimulation or natural cycle IVF,
and if so in which patients or context?

GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING
HORMONE AGONISTS AND
ANTAGONISTS IN THE CONTEXT OF
COS AND TO TRIGGER OVULATION
David R. Meldrum, M.D. and
Robert F. Casper, M.D.
At the beginning of the 1980s, researchers were starting to
experiment with a new class of drug called gonadotropinreleasing hormone (GnRH) agonists, named due their
enhanced ability to stimulate pituitary GnRH receptors. In
1982, in collaboration with the Salk institute, where much of
the work on characterizing GnRH had been done, we
(D.R.M., R.J.C., J.L., W.V., H.L.J.) were ﬁrst to describe the
use of repeated daily administration of a GnRH agonist in
women with endometriosis (426). At the end of 28 days of their
Nal-Glu agonist, mean estradiol levels were in the postmenopausal range. We proposed that a medical oophorectomy
could be used as a new approach in treatment of endometriosis. Making the deadline for submission to the next Society
for Gynecology Investigation meeting was an interesting
challenge. The UCLA pharmacy told me to get in a long line
to have the drug put into vials. I went to the associate dean
for research and after explaining the potential paradigm shift
we were proposing, a pharmacist, with me assisting, had the
drug in vials that next weekend and I made the Society for Gynecology Investigation abstract deadline.
Researchers and clinicians have used downregulation to
describe suppression of the pituitary due to repeated agonist
administration. Although we subsequently showed that
continued secretion of fragments of the gonadotropin alpha
subunit demonstrated continued stimulation of the GnRH receptor and a post-receptor mechanism of suppression (427),

266
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
the term downregulation became ingrained in the literature
rather than the more appropriate term, desensitization.
During the early to mid-1980s the most difﬁcult thing we
and our IVF couples had to deal with was the 20% to 30%
incidence of ovulation prior to oocyte retrieval. Patients
would come in prepared for laparoscopy only to be sent
home because ovulation had occurred. Even at retrieval, we
sometimes found oocytes in the culdesac ﬂuid, observed the
ovarian capsule spreading open before our eyes, or aspirated
an oocyte from a stigma where ﬂuid had released but the
oocyte had been retained.
It was therefore inevitable that we and others in the U.S.
began to use a newly available agonist, leuprolide acetate, to
block ovulation, although its use was off-label. In 1989, we
proposed that GnRH suppression should be routinely used,
based on our own experience with excellent results that appeared to be superior to cycles without agonist (428). Due to
the greater agonist effect and more cyst production when
the drug was started in the follicular phase, we advocated
routine mid-luteal administration. The outcomes may also
be better due to greater synchronization of the follicular
cohort in the luteal phase. Pellicer et al. (429) also reported
improved stimulation when the agonist was started at least
8 days after ovulation. Even without having a higher success
rate, later shown in a meta-analysis to be two-fold, simply the
avoidance of premature ovulation by the agonist was sufﬁcient to justify routine use. Still today, after almost 30 years,
use of leuprolide acetate in IVF patients remains ‘‘off-label’’.
A further advantage of agonist suppression prior to
ovarian stimulation was that suppression could be varied in
duration, offering patients and the IVF center the ability to
program cycles. Extending the agonist suppression caused a
minimal increase in cycle cancellation, but some women
had side effects such as severe headaches and short-term
memory loss due to the rapid and profound drop of the estradiol level. In one unfortunate anecdote, a woman was about
to give an important talk and could not remember what she
had planned to say. Clearly such effects were unacceptable,
leading us and others to routinely precede the agonist with
a variable duration of oral contraceptive administration to
provide that same programing but without prolonged estrogen deprivation. That approach had the additional advantages of blunting any agonist effect and reducing the
incidence of cyst formation. As long as a reasonable level
of luteinizing hormone (LH) activity was provided during
stimulation, use of the oral contraceptive did not appear to
affect stimulation response or cycle success.
Since that early use of agonist, due to the introduction of
recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and the goal
of doing away with use of urinary human menopausal gonadotropins (hMG), one of the main issues was whether stimulation could be equally effective with using only FSH. We had
continued using LH due to a study we had carried out showing
that bioactive LH/hCG was signiﬁcantly suppressed on the
day of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) compared to
control subjects on day 3 of menses who had not received
agonist (430). The lower levels were in spite of the leuprolide
acetate group receiving 225 IU of hMG. In the normal menstrual cycle, bioactive LH is low in the early follicular phase

and rises markedly prior to ovulation. Over the next several
years it was conﬁrmed that there was a small but, signiﬁcant
beneﬁt in the live birth rate with use of FSH and LH compared
to FSH alone (431).
Another early question to investigate was whether the
agonist would reliably prevent premature luteinization. We
were ﬁrst to report, using extracted serum specimens and
radioimmunoassay (RIA), that in spite of suppression of endogenous gonadotropins with agonist, women with serum progesterone (P) on the day of hCG administration exceeding 0.9 ng/
mL had a reduced pregnancy rate (432). The women with
elevated serum P had received signiﬁcantly higher levels of
ovarian stimulation. Our ﬁnding dovetailed with the current
cut-off using enzyme immunoassay. When we changed to
that platform, by assaying specimens using both methods,
our cut-off of 0.9 ng/mL with RIA was equivalent to the 1.5
ng/mL currently commonly used for those newer, although
less accurate, assay techniques. Although originally assumed
to be an LH effect, it was later realized that FHS was largely
responsible for the progesterone rise, and further, that the balance of FSH and LH activity determined the chance of occurrence of a signiﬁcant P rise (433). Now, with the advent of
vitriﬁcation of embryos for deferred transfer, measurement
of P has assumed greater importance for those programs doing
fresh transfer for some or all of their patients. However, due to
the inaccuracies of P measurement using enzyme immunoassay on unextracted serum compared to mass spectrometry,
reliable clinical decision making regarding deferred transfer
is problematic. Among other reasons, that argues in favor of
routine ‘‘freeze all’’.
It now appears that comparisons of outcomes using all
FSH versus all hMG for stimulation were confounded by the
greater stimulation of P secretion with either an excess
amount of FSH or LH activity. Werner et al. (433) showed
that lower P levels were achieved with a balance of FSH
and LH activity (for example 150 IU of FSH and 150 IU of
hMG), due to complex biochemical mechanisms described
in their publication. Comparisons of outcomes using varying
amounts of FSH and LH for freeze-all cycles will require reinvestigating outcomes with all hMG or a balance of hMG
and FSH contrasted to the use of FSH alone with deferred
transfer. In the absence of such information we have
continued to assume that some LH is required for optimal
health of the mature oocyte and have therefore used a balance
of the two gonadotropin preparations for freeze all cycles.
Unfortunately, agonist suppression increased the incidence of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS), most
likely due to synchronization of the follicular cohort. As
will be described, that drawback, together with requiring a
longer series of injections, set the stage for a wholesale
change in stimulation to use of GnRH antagonists. That paradigm shift yielded multiple advantages over use of agonists,
and also allowed agonist trigger of ovulation with an associated dramatic reduction in OHSS.
In 1988, I (R.F.C.) joined the University of Toronto and
was asked to develop an academic REI division and an IVF
program using vaginal ultrasound oocyte retrievals instead
of the current laparoscopic retrievals. Consequently, the physicians in the division needed training in vaginal ultrasound.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
267
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 25

Mean ( standard error of the mean) serum luteinizing hormone (LH)
concentrations ( C—C) in the group of 9 women who were given
gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogue (GnRH-a), compared
with of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) (o—o) and LH
(O—O) concentrations in the group of 9 women who were
given hCG for follicular maturation. The arrow indicates the time of
GnRH-a and hCG administration. ET ¼ embryo transfer.
Figure reproduced with the permission of Elsevier Inc. (434).
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

A young Israeli fellow, Dr. Yael Gonen, who had already been
in Toronto for about a year, was looking for research projects
and during the intensive vaginal ultrasound experience we
observed and published a correlation between endometrial
thickness and the three-line endometrial pattern with pregnancy rates. However, even controlling for endometrial
pattern and thickness, pregnancy rates with IVF were quite
low back then and it was not clear whether the poor results
were related to stimulation protocols and oocyte quality or
to suboptimal embryo culture systems. We hypothesized
that we might improve oocyte quality by trying to mimic
the endogenous gonadotropin surge in both duration (48
hours) and quality (LH and FSH rise) when triggering ﬁnal
oocyte maturation. Based on work as a fellow with Sam
Yen at UCSD, we chose a single dose of GnRH agonist as a
trigger and did an initial study to compare the results with
the standard dose of hCG (434).
Eighteen women undergoing IVF stimulation with 5 days
of clomiphene citrate (CC) 100 mg and 75 to 150 IU of human
menopausal gonadotropins (hMG) were randomized to
receive either a single hCG (5000 IU) or leuprolide acetate
(0.5 mg) injection when at least 2 follicles of 1.8 cm diameter
were seen on ultrasound. We followed the women with serial
blood sampling for LH, FSH, hCG, estradiol, and progesterone
at baseline and after triggering. We determined that serum LH
and FSH levels were elevated for 34 hours after GnRH agonist
administration (Fig. 25) whereas serum hCG levels were still
detectable 6 days after hCG injection, without any rise in
serum FSH. Luteal phase levels of progesterone and estradiol
were lower in the GnRH agonist triggered cycles compared to
the hCG cycles, but interestingly the luteal phase length was
similar in both groups. There were three live births in the
GnRH agonist triggered group in the absence of any luteal
support. This study provided evidence that a single bolus of
GnRH agonist in an IVF cycle resulted in adequate release

of LH and FSH to complete the ﬁnal stage of follicular maturation, the retrieval of fertilizable oocytes, normal embryo
development and pregnancy (434). In this study, no luteal
support was given and the luteal phases were similar to natural cycles. I now believe that this rather remarkable ﬁnding
resulted from the CC used for follicular stimulation since we
showed many years later that CC results in prolonged LH
elevation in natural cycles when given for augmentation of
ovulation. The LH elevation may have been long enough to
rescue the corpora lutea.
Independent of our group, Itzkovitz et al. (435) published
a similar study the following year using one or two doses of
GnRH agonist to trigger ﬁnal oocyte maturation in women
undergoing IVF. This group also found good oocyte maturity,
fertilization and pregnancies with the GnRH agonist trigger
and lower serum estradiol and progesterone levels in 8 women
with excessive response to gonadotropins. There were no
cases of OHSS and the authors suggested that the GnRH
agonist trigger may be a useful strategy to prevent OHSS.
We then published a prospective randomized trial in 179
women undergoing IVF triggered with hCG 5,000 IU or a single 0.5 mg dose of leuprolide acetate (436). We observed the
same pregnancy rates with both triggers although luteal phase
deﬁciency was now observed in several of the GnRH agonist
triggered cycles. Luteal progesterone levels were signiﬁcantly
lower despite low-dose progesterone administration (50 mg
two times per day vaginally). We recorded 16 women (18%)
in the GnRH agonist group who had clinically short luteal
phases. By the time of this study, ovarian stimulation for
IVF had progressed so that many patients received the new
highly puriﬁed FSH without CC and this might explain the
luteal phase defects that were not seen in the ﬁrst trial. This
study’s results were a harbinger of the luteal phase defects
and low pregnancy rates seen with the GnRH agonist trigger
once GnRH antagonist was developed for use in IVF cycles.
Around the same time as these publications, GnRH agonist
was utilized for the long luteal phase stimulation protocol for
IVF, which revolutionized the ﬁeld by eliminating the occurrence of premature LH rises. However, the desensitization of
pituitary GnRH receptors in this protocol prevented induction
of a gonadotropin surge by a bolus of GnRH agonist.
In 1994, GnRH antagonist was introduced in controlled
ovarian stimulation protocols to prevent unwanted LH surges.
This resulted in renewed interest in the GnRH agonist trigger
as an alternative to hCG and to prevent OHSS in women who
had an excessive response to stimulation. Since GnRH agonists have greater afﬁnity for GnRH receptors than GnRH antagonists, the agonist can displace the antagonist from the
receptor resulting in LH and FSH release. The evidence that
GnRH agonist could successfully trigger ﬁnal follicle maturation in GnRH antagonist cycles was ﬁrst published in 2000 in
overstimulated IVF cycles to prevent OHSS (437) and later
conﬁrmed in normal response cycles.
It quickly became apparent that GnRH agonist triggering
together with GnRH antagonist was associated with inadequate luteal phases and lower pregnancy rates with fresh embryo transfer (438). The luteolytic effect of this protocol was
beneﬁcial in preventing OHSS as shown by several publications. The cause for the luteal phase defects was not clear

268
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 26

as release of pigment epithelial derived factor from
granulosa-luteal cells and consequent inhibition of vascular
endothelial growth factor secretion (440). Endometrial receptivity can be preserved by adding low dose hCG for luteal support or by adding high dose estrogen and progesterone to
maintain the endometrium. However, the most common strategy is cycle segmentation by freezing all embryos for transfer
in a subsequent cycle.

UNDERSTANDING THE LUTEAL
PHASE IN STIMULATED ASSISTED
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY
CYCLES
Human M. Fatemi, M.D., Ph.D and
Paul Devroey, M.D., Ph.D.

Time course of luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH), estradiol (E2), and progesterone serum concentrations (mean
 standard error of the mean) in response to two injections of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (LRF-Ag) 24 hours apart in
the mid-luteal phase of 4 normal cycling women. There was a
vigorous and sustained release of LH and FSH after the ﬁrst GnRH
agonist injection, but no response following the second injection.
*P<.05; **P<.005. Figure reproduced with permission from
American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

but speculation ranged between pituitary desensitization with
central LH deﬁciency versus a direct effect of GnRH agonist on
luteal steroidogenesis. I believe the evidence supports a central
effect, although not pituitary desensitization. We showed in
1979 (439) that one or two boluses of GnRH agonist in the midluteal phase of natural cycles resulted in luteolysis and a short
luteal phase. When two doses of 50 mcg of GnRH agonist were
given 24 hours apart, there was a massive release of LH and
FSH (double the spontaneous LH peak level) with the ﬁrst
dose and no response at all to the second dose (Fig. 26). This
24-hour time frame is too short for pituitary receptor desensitization and likely represents complete depletion of stored LH
and FSH with too little time to regenerate more gonadotropin
for release with the second GnRH agonist dose. Alternatively,
it could represent disruption of the processing of gonadotropin
as demonstrated by Meldrum et al. (427) in his early work on
agonist effects on the pituitary. We ruled out a direct inhibitory effect of GnRH agonist since the corpora lutea could be
rescued by addition of exogenous hCG, and we also showed
the absence of any direct inhibitory effect of GnRH or GnRH
agonist on human luteal cell steroidogenesis in vitro.
Today, the main use of the GnRH agonist trigger is to prevent OHSS in women who hyper-respond to gonadotropin
stimulation in GnRH antagonist protocols. The mechanism
is likely through both luteolysis as discussed above as well

The luteal phase is deﬁned as the period between ovulation
and either the establishment of a pregnancy or the onset of
menses two weeks later. Following ovulation, a corpus luteum
is formed which secretes steroids, necessary for secretory
transformation of the endometrium (441). If conception and
implantation occur, the developing blastocyst secretes human
chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG), the role of which is to maintain the corpus luteum and its secretions (441). Human chorionic gonadotrophin produced by the embryo will maintain
the secretory activity of the corpus luteum due to its structural
similarity with luteinizing hormone (LH) and thereby activating the same receptor.
Under the inﬂuence of progesterone, the endometrium
undergoes secretory transformation. Furthermore, local vasodilatation and relaxation of the uterine muscle is promoted.
Implantation is a dynamic process involving the apposition, adherence and invasion of the endometrium by a blastocyst. Successful implantation is dependent on both
embryological and endometrial factors. The endometrium
must be receptive to the embryo with synchrony between
the embryo stage and the endometrium. Despite the many advances in assisted reproduction implantation continues to be
the rate-limiting step.
Throughout the menstrual cycle, the endometrium undergoes cyclical changes that prepare for embryonic implantation. The endometrium is only receptive to the embryo
during a very limited time period generally referred to as
the window of implantation (WOI) in the luteal phase. In a
natural and idealized 28-day cycle, it is thought to occur
approximately between day 22 to day 24. Previously, it was
assumed that the WOI is more or less constant in time in all
women. However, it has been shown that the WOI can differ
and displacement of the WOI may result in infertility and
repeated implantation failure.

Cause of the luteal phase defect in stimulated
in vitro fertilization cycles
In 1949, Georgeanna Jones, ﬁrst described luteal phase deﬁciency as the premature onset of menses resulting from

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
269
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
deﬁcient progesterone production, correctable by exogenous
progesterone administration. It is well established that the
luteal phase of almost all stimulated in vitro fertilization
(IVF) cycles is defective (442). The etiology of luteal phase
defect in stimulated IVF cycles has been debated for more
than three decades.
Initially, it was incorrectly thought that the removal of
large quantities of granulosa cells during the oocyte retrieval
might diminish the most important source of progesterone
synthesis by the corpora lutea, leading to a defect of the luteal
phase. Another proposal suggested that the prolonged pituitary recovery that followed the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist co-treatment designed to prevent
spontaneous LH rise in stimulated cycles resulted in a luteal
phase defect.
The introduction of GnRH antagonists in IVF raised speculation that a rapid recovery of the pituitary function would
obviate the need for luteal phase supplementation. However,
studies have conﬁrmed that luteolysis is also initiated prematurely in antagonist co-treated IVF cycles, resulting in a signiﬁcant reduction in the luteal phase length and
compromising the chances for pregnancy Despite the rapid
recovery of the pituitary function in GnRH antagonist protocols luteal phase supplementation remains mandatory (442).
Today, it is clear that the main cause of the luteal phase defect
in stimulated assisted reproductive technology (ART) cycles is
related to the supraphysiological levels of steroids secreted by
a high number of corpora lutea during the early luteal phase,
which directly inhibits LH release via a negative feedback action at the hypothalamic-pituitary axis level (443). Luteinizing hormone support during the luteal phase is entirely
responsible for the maintenance and the normal steroidogenic
activity of the corpus luteum and withdrawal of LH, causes
premature luteolysis.

Inﬂuence of progesterone on the endometrium in
natural and stimulated cycles
In 1950, Noyes et al. (444) studied the different histological
appearances of the endometrium. Under the inﬂuence of progesterone, the epithelial glands and vasculature continue to
grow resulting in a denser endometrium. In 1975, by
describing the histology for each speciﬁc day after ovulation,
Noyes et al. (444) established the classic endometrial-dating
paradigm that still serves as the gold standard for clinical
evaluation of luteal function. An endometrial biopsy is
considered to be out of phase if it shows a difference of
more than 2 days between the histologic dating and the actual
day after ovulation (444).
Comparison of endometrial steroid receptors and proliferation index between natural cycles and GnRH-agonist/
human menopausal gonadotropin-stimulated cycles for IVF
have revealed distinct alterations in endometrial maturation.
On the day of oocyte retrieval in stimulated cycles, a more
advanced secretory endometrial maturation combined with
reduced estrogen and progesterone receptors and a low proliferation index in glands and stroma has been found (445).
It is assumed that the supraphysiological levels of estradiol and progesterone during stimulation lead to a reduced

number of estradiol and progesterone receptors and a low
proliferation index in glands and stroma. These endometrial
alterations may adversely affect implantation.

Endocrine proﬁle in IVF-cycles after oocyte
retrieval, depending on the type of
ﬁnal oocyte maturation
In stimulated IVF cycles, ﬁnal oocyte maturation is a crucial
step when planning to retrieve oocytes from preovulatory follicles. Human chorionic gonadotrophin is usually administered for ﬁnal oocyte maturation to mimic the mid-cycle LH
surge. In GnRH-agonist protocols ﬁnal oocyte maturation is
achieved by the administration of hCG. In recent years, the
use of GnRH-agonist in GnRH-antagonist-protocols has
become increasingly common. Human chorionic gonadotrophin and LH activate the same receptor, however, differ
signiﬁcantly in their half-life, <60 minutes for LH and >24
hours for hCG. Following hCG-administration for ﬁnal oocyte
maturation theca cell production of progesterone is sustained
for at least 5 days attributed to both LH-activity and the halflife of hCG of more than 24 hours. In contrast, low levels of
endogenous LH after GnRH-agonist trigger lead to low progesterone levels and subsequent luteal phase insufﬁciency
(446).

Luteal phase support in ART
To counterbalance luteal phase insufﬁciency after ovarian
stimulation, luteal phase support (LPS) is recommended.
Currently available formulations of progesterone include oral,
vaginal, rectal, subcutaneous (SC), and intramuscular (IM).

Oral progesterone
Natural micronized progesterone administered orally is subjected to ﬁrst-pass pre-hepatic and hepatic metabolism. This
metabolic activity results in progesterone degradation to its
5a- and 5b-reduced metabolites (441). Oral administration
of progesterone yields poorly sustained plasma progesterone
concentrations and its use as luteal phase support in IVF
yielded very poor results. Parenteral administration (vaginal,
rectal, SC, and IM) of progesterone overcomes the metabolic
consequences of orally administered progesterone.
Dydrogesterone is an established oral retro-progesterone
approved for the treatment of threatened and recurrent
miscarriage (associated with proven progesterone deﬁciency),
and infertility due to luteal phase insufﬁciency (447).
Recently, a Phase III randomized controlled trial comparing
the efﬁcacy, safety, and tolerability of oral dydrogesterone
as compared to micronized vaginal progesterone for luteal
support in in vitro fertilization was published reporting comparable ongoing pregnancy rates (447).

Subcutaneous and intramuscular progesterone
Progesterone is rapidly absorbed after IM injection, with peak
concentrations achieved after approximately 8 hours. However, the IM application of progesterone may be painful and
daily injections are required to sustain sufﬁcient progesterone
concentrations. In addition, swelling, redness, and even

270
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
sterile abscess formation may be experienced at the injection
site. It has been reported that the use of IM progesterone may
be associated with eosinophilic pneumonia, a severe
morbidity in otherwise healthy young patients (448). Since
the administration of vaginal progesterone is comparable to
administration of IM progesterone for luteal phase support
in assisted reproductive treatment, IM progesterone is not recommended as a ﬁrst choice for LPS. A previous study evaluated the administration of SC progesterone as compared to
vaginally administered progesterone for luteal phase support
of IVF and reported that the SC route of administration was
well-tolerated and comparable in efﬁcacy to a vaginal insert
(449). However, the conclusions of the study are limited to the
progesterone dosing regimen studied and the duration of
treatment for the patient population studied (449). Further
studies are required prior to the implementation of the SC
route of administration into routine clinical practice.

Vaginal progesterone
Following vaginal application, serum progesterone concentrations reach maximal levels after approximately 3 to 8 hours
and then fall continuously over the next 8 hours. In the majority
of cases, 300-600 mg of vaginal progesterone are administered
daily, divided into 2 or 3 doses. Vaginally administered progesterone is cleared from the circulation faster as compared to IM
progesterone and serum progesterone levels are higher after
IM administration as compared to vaginal gel administration
(441). Independent from the measured serum progesterone
levels, adequate secretory endometrial transformation is
achieved following vaginal progesterone use. In addition, endometrial progesterone levels are higher after vaginal progesterone
administration as compared to IM injection (441). Vaginally
administered progesterone exerts a direct local effect on the
endometrium and myometrium prior entering the systemic circulation. This is called ﬁrst uterine pass effect. Until now, the
mechanism of the ﬁrst uterine pass effect is not fully understood
and different modes of action are discussed: absorption of progesterone into the rich venous or lymphatic vaginal system and/
or possibly direct drug diffusion through the tissues or even due
to intraluminal transfer from the uterus to the vagina, similar to
sperm transport. As the vaginal route is effective in providing
sufﬁcient luteal phase support and has minimal side-effects, it
is the preferred route of progesterone administration. If the patient complains of vaginal irritation and discomfort secondary
to discharge rectal administration may also be effective.

Human chorionic gonadotrophin for luteal phase
support
Following the administration of hCG, luteolysis will not occur
as the corpora lutea will be stimulated and progesterone production will be maintained. For many years, hCGadministration was the standard form of luteal phase support.
The disadvantage is the possible risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, particularly in those patients who have responded well to stimulation. Therefore, hCG should not be
the ﬁrst choice of luteal phase support in stimulated ART
cycles.

Timing of LPS with progesterone
Ovarian stimulation results in supraphysiological steroid concentrations with consequent inhibition of LH secretion by the
pituitary via negative feedback at the level of the
hypothalamic–pituitary axis resulting in declining and low
progesterone levels after oocyte retrieval. To avoid a progesterone deﬁciency and therefore a negative impact on the
endometrium, LPS has to be initiated before the endogenous
progesterone levels are decreasing or low but pre-ovulatory
exposure of the endometrium to progesterone may also
have a negative impact on endometrial receptivity. Therefore,
the timing of luteal phase support is critical to treatment success. A recent systematic review suggests that there appears to
be a window for progesterone start time between the evening
of the oocyte retrieval and up to day 3 following oocyte
retrieval in hCG triggered cycles (450).

Duration of luteal phase support
In early pregnancy, a deﬁciency of endogenous LH will be
compensated for by rapidly increasing amounts of hCG produced by the developing embryo. The use of progesterone
supplementation after oocyte retrieval is practically universal
but the optimal duration of progesterone administration remains controversial. A meta-analysis evaluated the optimal
duration of progesterone supplementation in pregnant
women after IVF/intracytoplasmic sperm injection. The authors of this study reported that the currently available evidence suggests that progesterone supplementation beyond
the ﬁrst positive hCG test after IVF/intracytoplasmic sperm
injection might generally be unnecessary, although largescale randomized controlled trials are needed to strengthen
this conclusion (451).

Luteal support after GnRH-administration for
ﬁnal oocyte maturation
Administration of a GnRH-agonist for ﬁnal oocyte maturation is becoming increasingly common, primarily as this
approach signiﬁcantly reduces the incidence of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) due to rapid luteolysis after
administration. Following the introduction of GnRH-agonist
for ﬁnal oocyte maturation in GnRH-antagonist protocols
studies reported very poor reproductive outcomes. This
ﬁnding was largely attributed to the induced severe luteolysis
which cannot be counterbalanced using standard luteal phase
support with progesterone ‘‘only’’ administration (452). To
prevent luteolysis, administration of hCG or high doses of steroids are considered to be essential. Luteolysis will occur
when LH support is withdrawn from the corpus luteum for
R3 days but interestingly, corpus luteal function can be
rescued if LH activity is reinitiated within approximately 72
hours (453).
Different treatment options have been described to maintain progesterone production from the corpora lutea and
rescue the luteal phase. As GnRHa-induced luteolysis can be
reversed by the administration of hCG, one treatment concept
is the application of low-doses of hCG during the luteal phase.
Despite low dosages of hCG, OHSS can still occur in some

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
271
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
patients. It has been shown that longer duration of stimulation, higher levels of progesterone on the day of ﬁnal oocyte
maturation and higher numbers of retrieved oocytes will
result in higher levels of progesterone 48 hours after oocyte
retrieval (454). Therefore, luteolysis after GnRH-agonist
trigger is patient–speciﬁc and also luteal phase support requires individualization (454).

Concept of individualized luteal phase support
after ﬁnal oocyte maturation with
GnRH-agonist trigger
Over the last number of years, ovarian stimulation for IVFtreatment has become increasingly individualized based on
assessments of each patients ovarian reserve such as by the
use of antim€
ullerian hormone and ultrasound-based antral
follicle count. However, until now LPS is performed uniformly in almost all patients.
Previously, it was demonstrated that GnRH-agonist
trigger for ﬁnal oocyte maturation would lead to severe luteolysis (446). However, luteolysis is not following the same
pattern in all patients. To avoid unnecessary administration
of hCG with the potential risk of late-onset OHSS-development, a new concept of luteal coasting has been developed.
The concept of luteal coasting transfers the experience from
follicular phase coasting for OHSS prevention to the early
luteal phase for patients having fresh transfers (455). Daily
monitoring of progesterone levels is required and a rescue
hCG bolus can be administered, once progesterone concentrations decrease below 30 nmol/L (455). This novel approach reduces the risk of OHSS development in high-responder
patients undergoing fresh embryo transfer without adversely
affecting reproductive outcome (455).

Conclusions
The cause of luteal phase defect in stimulated IVF cycles
seems to be related to the supraphysiological levels of steroids. Luteal phase support with hCG or progesterone after assisted reproduction results in increased pregnancy rates.
However, hCG is associated with a greater risk of OHSS.
Vaginal, SC, and IM progesterone seem to have comparable
outcomes. However, IM progesterone should not be the ﬁrst
choice due to possible side effects. Natural micronized
progesterone is not effective, if taken orally. The duration of
luteal phase support in stimulated IVF cycles does not
appear to be mandatory beyond the day of a positive hCG
test (451).
The new concept of personalized luteal phase support focuses on the luteal phase after ﬁnal oocyte maturation with
GnRH agonist in a GnRH antagonist protocol. Personalized
luteal phase support demonstrates that the hCG dose and
timing can be individualized based on individual luteolysis
pattern (454). It appears that OHSS after GnRH agonist
administration for ﬁnal oocyte maturation can be avoided
by individualization of luteal phase support and adopting
the novel approach of luteal coasting in high responder patients planning fresh embryo transfer without adversely
affecting their chance of achieving pregnancy (454, 455).

OVARIAN HYPERSTIMULATION
SYNDROME
Antonio Pellicer, M.D. and
Daniela Galliano, M.D., Ph.D.
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) would probably
never have appeared if assisted reproduction technologies
(ART) were developed as a very successful approach to treat
infertility from the very beginning. But, unfortunately, that
was not the case. Although the ﬁrst in vitro fertilization
(IVF) cases were managed with natural cycles by Steptoe
and Edwards, it soon became apparent from the work done
in Australia that a greater number of oocytes collected provided a higher chance of getting more (and perhaps) better
embryos, and controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) soon
became a substantial part of an IVF cycle. Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome is the most serious complication resulting
from the medical manipulation of the ovary.
Soon after the introduction of ovulation induction (OI) in
anovulatory patients with clomiphene citrate and gonadotropins in the early 1960s (456), it became apparent that OHSS
was a potential complication reported to a mild degree of
severity in OI. A couple of decades later, the introduction of
aggressive COS in women undergoing ART who required
the yield of a substantial number of oocytes resulted in
OHSS as a routine and frequent complication in normoovulatory women.
Rarely, OHSS may occur in the absence of ovarian stimulation, generally appearing between the 8th and 14th week
of spontaneous pregnancies. This is due to ovarian hypersensitivity to gonadotropins resulting from mutations in the
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor; high levels of endogenous gonadotropins in molar pregnancies or multiple pregnancies; high levels of molecules structurally similar to
gonadotropins, such thyroid stimulating hormone in hypothyroid states, occupying their receptors; or women with pituitary adenomas (457).
Since the description of OHSS, many investigators have
tried to understand its physiopathology, describing the symptoms and applying methods for management of already established full OHSS. Although this literature has been
helpful in managing symptoms, it was not until 10 years
ago that OHSS started to disappear from our terminology,
as the risk factors have been fully described and preventative
measures have been successfully employed.
The true incidence of OHSS has always been difﬁcult to
determine as there is no generally accepted deﬁnition of the
syndrome. Moreover, it depends upon the clinical setting (OI
or COS), the drugs employed, and the type of patient treated
(either at risk or not at risk). When ovulation is induced
with clomiphene citrate or aromatase inhibitors, either for
timed intercourse or intrauterine insemination, a mild form
of OHSS may occur, but moderate to severe OHSS is rarely
seen (459). In COS, the overall incidence of moderate and severe OHSS is 3% to 6% and 0.1% to 2%, respectively (458).
Hospitalization due to OHSS has been reported to range between 0.3% and 1.1% (458).

272
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
Pathophysiology
OHSS results from multiple follicular development with gonadotropins and subsequent ovulation triggering with human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). If pregnancy follows,
trophoblast-derived hCG will worsen the symptoms. Also, it
should be recognized as a phenomenon localized to the
ovaries. In fact, oophorectomy restores normality and OHSS
does not develop in experimental conditions in which ovaries
are not present (459). Similarly, OHSS does not occur when
many follicles develop as a result of COS with gonadotropins
and hCG for ovulation triggering is withheld. This shows that
hCG is the driver of all pathophysiological events in OHSS.
hCG has no direct vasoactive properties, but vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) acts as the necessary hCG mediator that binds to its type 2 receptor (VEGFR-2). This in turn
increases vascular permeability in the ovarian capillaries
and leads to substantial vascular leakage and ascites formation (459).
Among women who display OHSS, the most important
group are those with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
Recent studies have provided information about the role of
dopamine in ovarian physiology and its relationship with
OHSS. Dopamine binds functionally to VEGF, avoiding phosphorylation and thus increasing capillary permeability. In
other words, it acts to physiologically balance the action of
VEGF on vessel permeability (459). It turns out that PCOS
women display lower amounts of type-2 dopamine receptors
in granulosa cells compared to normal individuals (460). In
contrast, the secretion of 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl-acetic acid,
the primary metabolite of dopamine, is signiﬁcantly increased
in PCOS, suggesting that the metabolism of dopamine is faster
in PCOS than in normo-ovulatory women. All in all, it seems
that PCOS women display an increased vascularization,
which could be explained by higher serum and follicular
VEGF levels compared to normal ovulatory subjects. However, the dopaminergic system is different than in normal individuals, which results in higher expression of the signs and
symptoms of the syndrome (460).

Clinical manifestations
The variety of clinical manifestations of OHSS is the consequence of the processes that deﬁne the syndrome. Enlarged
ovaries may themselves produce abdominal discomfort.
Increased ovarian vascular permeability leads to ﬂuid accumulation in the abdomen and other body cavities, which
then leads to abdominal heaviness and breathing difﬁculties
due to limited diaphragmatic mobility (461). Furthermore,
this shift in serum from the intravascular to the extravascular
space causes hemoconcentration and reduced blood perfusion, resulting in reduced general organ perfusion. Oliguria
and renal insufﬁciency may occur, and liver function may
also be affected. Moreover, hemoconcentration increases the
risk of thromboembolic events. In very severe forms, renal
failure and reduced perfusion in other vital organs, such as
the brain and heart, may have fatal consequences (461).
There are two clinical forms of OHSS, both hCG related:
the early onset, occurring 3-7 days after hCG administration;
and the late onset, occurring 12-17 days after hCG adminis-

tration, which is related to pregnancy-induced hCG production (462). The early onset is usually mild to moderate,
while late OHSS is more severe as the rising hCG during pregnancy exacerbates the course of the syndrome.
In order to deﬁne an increasing degree of severity in the
establishment of OHSS, different classiﬁcations have been
published (461, 462) based upon the severity of symptoms,
signs, and laboratory ﬁndings.

Prevention of OHSS
An important step in the prevention of OHSS is to identify risk
factors before COS is started. The PCOS phenotype is among
the most relevant. Additional risk factors include women
who have previously developed OHSS, black women, and
younger patients (<35 y). The use of markers for ovarian
reserve has improved the risk assessment of OHSS. A cutoff value of 3.36 ng/mL serum antim€
ullerian hormone
levels has been considered a good predictor of OHSS. Levels
>10 ng/mL are associated with a threefold increase in the
incidence of OHSS. Antral follicle count (AFC) is also predictive of OHSS. The risk of OHSS increases from 2.2% in women
with an AFC <24 to 8.6% with an AFC >24 (462).
For all of these patients, a GnRH antagonist COS protocol
is strongly advised, with beneﬁts including similar pregnancy
rates compared to protocols employing long-GnRH agonist
suppression, lower costs, and lower risk of developing
OHSS. This appears to act at two levels: lower serum levels
of estradiol during ovarian stimulation, and the possibility
of triggering ovulation with a GnRH agonist by taking advantage of the ﬂare-up mechanism. It is also worth stressing that
the dose of gonadotropins used in women at risk should not be
higher than 150 IU/day.
Human chorionic gonadotropin has been widely employed
to mimic the mid-cycle surge of luteinizing hormone (LH) to
trigger ﬁnal oocyte maturation and ovulation for more than
60 years. Human chorionic gonadotropin has a longer halflife than LH and is known to initiate the cascade of events leading to OHSS. Human chorionic gonadotropin stimulates VEGF
release in granulosa-lutein cells that bind to VGEF-R2, which
increases vascular permeability in the ovaries (459).
Administration of a GnRH agonist is associated with an
initial ‘‘ﬂare-up’’ effect in which both serum LH and
follicle-stimulating hormone are increased (463). It has been
shown that a so-called GnRH agonist-induced surge of gonadotropins can last for 24-36 hours and induce oocyte maturation (463). An analysis of 17 RCTs that assessed GnRH
agonist compared with hCG trigger found that the agonist resulted in a lower incidence of OHSS in fresh autologous cycles
(odds ratio [OR]: 0.15, 95% conﬁdence interval [CI]: 0.05–
0.47), as well as in donor-recipient cycles (OR: 0.05, 95%
CI: 0.01– 0.28) (115) compared to hCG (462).
Once COS has started, a number of growing follicles >20
signiﬁcantly increases the risk of OHSS. Serum estradiol concentrations >3,500 pg/mL are also associated with OHSS
(462). Thus, in these patients it is imperative to avoid hCG
administration using GnRH agonists for ovulation triggering.
If this is not possible, it is recommended that the cycle be
cancelled.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
273
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
Adjuvant therapies during COS may also help to prevent
OHSS. The incidence of severe OHSS can be reduced in patients who receive a daily dose of 100 mg aspirin compared
to no treatment (462). For PCOS patients, Metformin at a
dose of 500 mg three times daily or 850 mg twice daily during
COS signiﬁcantly reduces the incidence of OHSS (462).
Another possible approach is to substitute gonadotropinreleasing hormone (GnRH) antagonists with progestogens in
COS with cycle segmentation. No randomized-controlled trial
has tested the role of these stimulation protocols in preventing
OHSS, but they are widely employed and the published experience using 4 to 10 mg/day medroxyprogesterone acetate
simultaneously with gonadotropins shows good quality oocytes and pregnancy rates without LH surges or OHSS (464).
Retrieval of >15 oocytes signiﬁcantly increases the chance
of OHSS (463). In these cases, oocyte/embryo vitriﬁcation
should be implemented after showing substantial and reproducible improvement in survival and overall health of newborn
infants (465). This freeze-all policy or cycle segmentation is
considered the best OHSS preventive measure as it avoids
late-onset OHSS, the most dangerous form of the syndrome.
If the number of oocytes collected is <15, embryo
replacement could be carefully considered in that cycle.
Studies have reported that agonist trigger was associated
with a lower live-birth rate (OR: 0.47, 95% CI: 0.31–0.70) in
fresh autologous cycles due to a luteal phase insufﬁciency.
That said, corpus luteum function can be sustained with a single 1,500 IU hCG injection administered the day of oocyte
retrieval (466). If the patient is not at risk, a second 1,500 IU
hCG injection can be administered ﬁve days later. However,
some cases of late-onset OHSS have been described, highlighting the fact that embryo transfer is a major driver of
OHSS regardless of the number of follicles developed (466).
Therefore, the freeze-all policy should always be considered
as a viable option in these cases.
It is advisable to measure serum LH on the day of triggering, as the chance of having a suboptimal response to
GnRH agonist triggering 12 hours after administration (LH
<15 UI/mL) can be as high as 25% if serum LH is undetectable, compared to 5% in the general population (467). The
suboptimal response is particularly evident in women with
anovulatory irregular cycles and when taking oral contraceptives for a long period of time.
Another option for overcoming a potential luteal phase
defect is supplementing the luteal phase with both estrogens
and progesterone according to standard steroid replacement
protocols, which maintains similar pregnancy rates regardless
of the triggering done with hCG or GnRH agonists (466).
Future alternatives to trigger ovulation without the risk of
OHSS may include the use of kisspeptins, a group of hypothalamic peptides that are essential for normal human fertility. It
has been shown that Kp-54 administration has a positive effect on egg maturation in women undergoing ART with a low
risk of inducing OHSS (468).
Due to the relevance of VEGF and VEGF-R2 in the pathophysiology of OHSS, we introduced the concept of targeting
VEGF by administering dopamine agonists (459). We showed
that both cabergoline and quinagolide signiﬁcantly reduced
ascites formation and OHSS development in non-pregnant

patients, but were ineffective in patients who became pregnant after embryo replacement (459). This may be either
because the amount of trophoblast-derived hCG was too
elevated to be compensated by the doses of dopamine agonist
administered, or because pregnancy stimulates other pathways that also affect vascular permeability irrespective of
VEGF blockage. Whether a more aggressive intravenous
administration of dopamine in women developing severe/
critical OHSS will work has not been studied, but there are
some reports showing that this strategy has successfully
rescued renal output in compromised cases (469).
If oocyte/embryos are vitriﬁed, letrozole can be employed
as a luteolytic agent resulting in reduced incidence of ascites
formation and overall moderate early-onset OHSS (470).
Another luteolytic strategy could be to use a GnRH antagonist
for 2-3 days.
Thus, today we have sufﬁcient alternatives to avoid OHSS
in most patients. Although the main driver of OHSS, the need
of an important oocyte yield still stands, the measures presented herein developed over the last 40 years are a guarantee
that this complication is almost gone from our medical
nomenclature in ART. However, it is our task to educate our
residents, fellows and patients in order to understand the potential complications of a high oocyte production and the
measures available to avoid OHSS.

ROLE OF ULTRASOUND IN
IN VITRO FERTILIZATION
Matts Wikland, M.D., Ph.D.
In 1978, the same year as the ﬁrst in vitro fertilization (IVF)
child was born, the ﬁrst study of the use of ultrasound for
monitoring follicular growth was published (471). At that
time the use of ultrasound imaging in early pregnancy and
obstetrics was developing rapidly and became used more
often in daily clinical work. However, ultrasound scanning
as a diagnostic tool in gynecology was, in those days, not
as widely appreciated as in obstetrics. However, with the
introduction of clinical IVF around 1980 and the fact that ultrasound could be a potential tool for monitoring follicular
maturation, the interest in utilizing the technique in IVF
started to grow. With the rapid increase of IVF cycles there
was a need for simpliﬁcation of certain steps in the clinical
procedure. One such step was oocyte retrieval, which in those
days was performed as a laparoscopy procedure, and therefore
had to be performed under general anesthesia at a hospital.
Knowing that ultrasound had been used for some years in
aiding the puncture of cystic and solid tumors gave IVF
groups the conﬁdence to explore the use of the technique in
oocyte retrieval. Rapid development of the technique led to
the introduction of vaginal sonography, which turned out
to be the ideal tool for guiding oocyte retrieval and made a
contribution to other clinical steps in the IVF cycle.

Oocyte retrieval
For the ﬁrst ﬁve years of clinical IVF, oocytes in most patients
were retrieved under the guidance of laparoscopy. However,

274
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

TABLE 10
Combination of different ultrasound scanning and puncturing routes
for oocyte retrievals.
Scanning type

Oocyte retrieval

Reference

Abdominal
Abdominal
Abdominal
Vaginal

Transabdominal
Transvaginal
Per urethral
Transvaginal

Lenz et al., 1981 (473)
Delenbach et al., 1984 (475)
Parsons et al., 1985 (476)
Wikland et al., 1985 (479)

Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

there were some major disadvantages such as the necessity for
general anesthesia, which made the procedure expensive and
often time-consuming. Furthermore, laparoscopy exposes
young women to a certain degree of risk. Thus, there was a
need for a more simple and safe technique for oocyte retrieval.
Mature ovarian follicles are large (18-20 mm in diameter)
cystic structures which can be imaged by ultrasound (471). As
early as 1972, a Danish group (472) described the
ultrasonically-guided percutaneous puncture of cystic and
solid tumors. In the beginning of the 1980s, the time when
clinical IVF started to grow, advances in ultrasound technology resulted in the production of real-time scanners of
compact size, which provided excellent real-time imaging.
These factors were important for the development of oocyte
retrieval guided by ultrasound.
As Danish researchers had had an impact on the development of ultrasound guided puncturing procedures, it is not
surprising that the ﬁrst report of successful ultrasoundguided oocyte retrieval came from the Danish IVF group in Copenhagen in 1981(473). Due to very open communication between the Danish IVF group and our IVF team in Gothenburg,
Sweden, we adopted the practice of ultrasound-guided follicle
aspiration quite early (474). The method both groups initially
practiced was abdominal real-time scanning and transabdominal puncture. This technique utilized a full urinary
bladder as an acoustic window. The method spread to other
groups and alternative puncturing routes, such as the transvaginal and per urethral, were developed while still using
abdominal scanning (475, 476). The different scanning and
puncturing routes are listed in Table 10. As often happens
with new techniques, there was initial skepticism. It was
claimed that fewer oocytes were retrieved than when using
laparoscopy. However, observational studies performed in
the middle of the 1980s showed no signiﬁcant differences
between the outcome of IVF procedures which had used
laparoscopy, versus transabdominal ultrasound, for oocyte
aspiration. The ﬁrst prospective randomized study was
performed by Lewin et al. (477) in 1986 and they found
similar outcomes in a comparison of the two methods. Still
there was one main criticism of the technique and that was
the pain patients experienced when the procedure was
performed under local anesthesia. For this reason, general
anesthesia was preferred and the advantages of
transabdominal ultrasound over laparoscopy for oocyte
aspiration were not widely appreciated. However, in 1983
our IVF group in Gothenburg started to explore the
possibility of performing vaginal sonography using a small

sector scanner. The idea was to avoid scanning via the
abdominal wall and the full urinary bladder, but instead to
scan via the vaginal fornix using a small sector transducer
placed in the vagina. This made it possible to get very close
to the ovaries and obtain excellent real-time imaging. However, the available sector scanners in those days were not ideal
for vaginal scanning so we started a collaboration with a
Danish ultrasound company, Br€
uel and Kjaer, and developed
a technique utilizing a speciﬁcally designed vaginal sector
transducer to guide transvaginal oocyte retrieval. Besides
the excellent imaging, the vaginal examination meant much
less discomfort for the patient, since there was no need for a
full urinary bladder. The advantages of vaginal scanning
were described by Meldrum and co-workers at an early stage
(478). As there was no need to puncture the abdominal wall
and the urinary bladder and the puncturing distance was
much shorter, the procedure could be carried out under local
anesthesia using a para cervical block. It could now easily be
performed as an outpatient procedure (479, 480).
Despite the lack of randomized controlled trials for transvaginal oocyte retrieval, under the guidance of vaginal ultrasound the technique proved to be simple and safe. It has been
reﬁned over the years and is today regarded as the gold standard. Complications are rare, but one must be aware that
placing a needle in the pelvis and in highly vascularized
ovaries can occasionally result in severe complications.
Several studies have reviewed the complications after transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS) guided follicle aspiration. In a
study following up more than 7,000 IVF cycles the severe
complication rate was 0.08% (481). It is probable that the
simpliﬁcation which the transvaginal oocyte retrieval has
meant for the IVF procedure has given more patients access
to assisted reproductive technology than if the procedure
had been performed by laparoscopy. Furthermore, development of the technique marked the start of the use of vaginal
sonography, which since then has become such an important
diagnostic tool in gynecology in general and in reproductive
medicine in particular.

Cycle monitoring
Follicular monitoring. In the early days of IVF, even though it
was possible to achieve a full-term pregnancy utilizing the
woman’s natural cycle, it was soon realized that multiple
follicular development could play a major role in its success.
Different protocols for controlled ovarian hyperstimulation
with gonadotropins became routine. In order to adjust gonadotropin dosage, ensure adequate follicular development and
decide on the time for triggering the ﬁnal oocyte maturation,
it was necessary to monitor the woman’s cycle. In the early
days of IVF, the tool for monitoring was a biochemical assay
of hormones such as estrogens, progesterone, and luteinizing
hormone in the urine or blood. However, the work of
Hackel€
oer and Robinson, showed that by measuring the
growth of the mean follicular diameter by ultrasound it was
possible to predict follicular maturation (471). With the introduction of linear array and sector real-time scanners, follicular scanning became much easier to carry out. The method
is extremely practical since it is non-invasive and can be

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
275
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
performed by the clinician or the sonographer and gives an
up-to-date status of the number and size of growing follicles.
With the introduction of TVUS, monitoring follicular development in IVF cycles soon became routine. However, initial
concerns were raised that there was a risk that ultrasound energy could have a negative inﬂuence on ovulation, or even on
the oocyte. This claim has never been proved.
Some groups use the method as the only tool for monitoring while others combine TVUS monitoring with estrogen
and progesterone levels. A Cochrane review was carried out,
based on randomized controlled trials where cycle monitoring
was performed either solely by two-dimensional (2D)-TVUS
or in combination with estrogen during controlled ovarian
hyperstimulation for IVF. No evidence was found that either
of the methods was superior with regard to clinical pregnancy
rate or the incidence of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome
(OHSS) (482). As good clinical practice, combining ultrasound
and serum estrogen in women at risk of OHSS should be
continued as a precaution.
Even though we know that decisions regarding ovulation
triggering are based on a mean follicular diameter commonly
set to 18-20 mm. However, in the literature there are no uniform recommendations for this measurement. In IVF treatment, the clinical decision regarding ovulation triggering is,
however, based on a 2D-TVUS measurement of the size and
number of follicles. Another interesting fact about the use of
TVUS for monitoring follicular development is that there are
no standardized protocols for the procedure. The size of the follicle, as measured by 2D-TVUS, is the mean of the two largest
diameters perpendicular to each other. It is obvious that as the
number and size of follicles grows, it becomes harder to measure them accurately and the method becomes increasingly
time-consuming. This explains the variability of follicular
measurements, both inter and intra observers. Problems using
2D-ultrasound in the standardization of follicular measurement and the development of three-dimensional (3D)-ultrasound, have led to the use of computerized algorithms for
counting and calculating the volume of follicles. This information is used for clinical decision-making in IVF treatments
(483). This automated measurement in 3D-TVUS is signiﬁcantly faster than in 2D-TVUS, which is why some groups
are supportive of this new technique. It is an interesting development which seems to have the potential for improving the
accuracy of follicular measurements and subsequent decisions.
Doppler analysis of the follicular blood ﬂow has also been
tested as a tool for monitoring follicular development and
maturation. However, the clinical value of the technique
has so far not been appreciated, at least partly because even
poorly vascularized follicles may contain oocytes that can
result in a normal pregnancy.
Endometrial monitoring. Ultrasound imaging of endometrial
thickness and pattern was described early as a possible clinical biomarker of estrogen levels in IVF cycles. Since then
the clinical value of using sonographic imagining of endometrial thickness and pattern in IVF has been tested in several
studies, but with conﬂicting results (484). Another uterine
parameter that can be visualized by TVUS and which has
been claimed to be valuable for IVF, is sub-endometrial

waves. The clinical value of this parameter is not currently
clear and thus not routinely used.
There are many ultrasound devices which also make it
possible to measure uterine blood ﬂow by means of the Doppler
technique. However, it has not yet been possible to show a clinical value for uterine Doppler analysis in IVF. Endometrial ultrasound parameters, as mentioned above, have so far not been
proved to be practical clinical tools in the monitoring of the IVF
cycle, and more studies combining and including new parameters are needed to fully explore their value.

Embryo transfer
The pregnancy rate in IVF is dependent on multiple factors.
One important factor is the embryo transfer technique. Traditionally it has been performed blind, using the clinical touch.
By using ultrasound to guide the procedure, it became
possible to visualize where the ﬂuid bubbles containing the
embryo/embryos were placed in the uterine cavity, which appeared to be of importance. Abdominal ultrasound-guided
embryo transfer was ﬁrst described by Strickler et al. (485).
During the last 20 years numerous studies have been performed comparing the ‘‘clinical touch’’ and ultrasoundguided embryo transfer, sometimes with conﬂicting results.
However, meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials has
demonstrated the beneﬁt of ultrasound guidance in pregnancy and live birth rates (486). Furthermore, prospective
randomized trials comparing 2D-TVUS with abdominal scanning showed that the former technique seems to be superior in
visualizing the catheter tip, so lessening the discomfort of patients. Thus, current knowledge strongly supports the use of
ultrasound as a routine method for guiding embryo transfer.

Pre-treatment assessment
During recent years, using TVUS to assess women prior to IVF
has been shown to be useful. It can be used for identifying
adnexal and uterine pathology and for assessment of the
ovarian reserve. The latter information can be used as a
possible indication of successful treatment as well as aiding
in clinical decisions, such as which stimulation protocol to use.
Antral follicle count. Prior to IVF treatment, many doctors
and patients would welcome a predictive test which could
indicate the chance of success. However, no such test is
currently available. Antral follicle count by TVUS, with the
purpose of assessing the ovarian reserve, is a tool that has attracted much interest over recent years and several studies
have been published. The test is based on counting small follicles (2-10 mm) in a 2D-ultrasound scan of both ovaries. An
important limitation of the method is that it is not standardized. It appears to be of similar value to measurements of the
antim€
ullerian hormone in the prediction of ovarian response,
and results appear to be contradictory. Further studies are
needed concerning the use of antral follicle count in examining ovarian aging and predicting pregnancy.

Conclusion
Ultrasound has become a key instrument in clinical IVF.
Its development started with the exploration of the

276
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
possibility of using ultrasound for guiding oocyte retrieval.
This led to the introduction of vaginal sonography, which
turned out to be the ideal tool for guiding oocyte retrieval
and is a method which has become the gold standard.

Since then, vaginal sonography has also proved to be an
extremely important tool for cycle monitoring and embryo
transfer, and shows promise in the pre-assessment of the
IVF cycle.

MALE REPRODUCTION
SEMEN ANALYSIS
Mark Sigman, M.D.
The analysis of seminal plasma has a storied history much
longer that of in vitro fertilization. The discovery of sperm begins with Johann Hamm, a Dutch medical student who, in
1677, brought Antonie van Leeuwenhoek a sample of pus
mixed with semen; likely from a male with gonorrhea.
Hamm reported that the sample was from ‘‘a man who had
lain with an unclean woman.’’ He had examined it under a
microscope and noticed many animalcules. Leeuwenhoek
conﬁrmed the student’s ﬁndings and then decided to examine
his own semen. Due to religious restrictions against masturbation, Leeuwenhoek had intercourse with his wife, then
collected and examined the sample. He found millions of
tiny animalcules moving about and called them semen animals (spermatozoa). He eventually wrote his ﬁndings in a letter to the Royal Philosophical Society of London taking care
to note that his semen was collected ‘‘without sinfully deﬁling
myself, remains as a residue after conjugal coitus’’ (487, 488).
There was very little advancement in male fertility evaluation over the next several centuries due to many societal
prejudices and assumptions such as the long held believe
that the ability to copulate was evidence of fertility. Clinical
evaluation began with post-coital testing which was advocated by Dr. Marion J. Sims to the New York County Medical
Society in 1868. He noted the presence or absence of sperm on
examination of post-coital cervical mucus. He also encountered much prejudice against examining semen from the
press which reported that ‘‘dabbling in the vagina with
speculum and syringe was incompatible with decency and
self-respect’’ (489).
Modern quantitative counting of spermatozoa was developed by Macomber and Sander in 1929. They concluded that
pregnancies could occur with sperm concentrations of <60
million/ml and that higher counts increased the chance of
pregnancy. The ﬁrst comprehensive approach to the study
of male fertility incorporating the semen analysis was by Robert Hotchkiss in his 1944 book Fertility in Men (489). He itemized the primary parameters of the semen analysis as volume,
viscosity, motility, sperm concentration, and sperm
morphology. Of interest, motility was gauged by three parameters: the percentage of motile sperm, the quality of forward
movement, and the change in motility over a 24-hour period.
While the ﬁrst two metrics remain as part of the modern analysis, the last is no longer reported as it has been found to have
no signiﬁcant clinical relevance. Without the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act and Occupational Safety and Health

Administration regulations, simple measurement techniques
were suggested such as the determination of viscosity by
compression of a drop of semen between the index ﬁnger
and thumb of the bare hand and of observing the tenacity
of the drop when the ﬁngers are separated (490).
The semen analysis was reﬁned by John MacLeod, a Ph.D.
and Rugh Gold (a statistician) who studied the semen parameters of Dr. Hotchkiss’s fertile and infertile couples over a
period of decades from the 1940s up through the development
of in vitro fertilization (IVF) in the 1970s. The methods of
proper semen analysis were reported in the 1977 book Male
Infertility which noted that while sperm morphology was
related to the chance of conception, abnormalities of
morphology had no relationship to abnormalities of pregnancy after conception (miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy, or
stillbirth) (491). The authors also advocated for measurement
of seminal pH as well as antisperm antibody assays. It is during the 1970s that the World Health Organization (WHO)
became involved in the evaluation of semen. This stemmed
from the organization’s interest in contraception development through the Male Task force of the WHO. It was initially
chaired by Dr. Alvin Paulson a former president of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (1980). The WHO was
not particularly interested in the evaluation of the infertile
male, but because male contraceptive development required
the ability to perform proper semen analyses; the organization pursued the development of standards of analysis. This
lead to the publication of the 1st edition of WHO Semen
Manual in 1980 which has been revised ﬁve times through
the 5th edition in 2010. One problem that plagued the interpretation of semen parameters from the beginning is how to
interpret the results. Up until the 5th edition, lower limits
(often termed limits of adequacy) were used for parameters
that were based on expert consensus. These stemmed from
MacLeod’s work wherein he initially suggested that a lower
threshold of sperm density of 60 million sperm/ml was appropriate. However, his analysis of semen parameters of fertile
and infertile couples ultimately lead him to recommend a
lower limit of 20 million sperm/ml. His data showed that
fewer fertile men than infertile men had counts below that
limit. This limit was ﬁnally changed in the 5th edition of
the WHO manual which utilized semen data from a large international cohort of men that conceived within 12 months to
develop reference ranges identifying the lower 5% one sided
conﬁdence interval thresholds (492, 493). This approach,
while statistically derived was quite controversial and
confusing to many practitioners (494). While the WHO
considers the ranges as reference ranges, not normal ranges,
many clinicians interpret the thresholds as absolute

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
277
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
indicators of infertility, despite the fact that 5% of fertile men
had parameters below the thresholds and many infertile men
had values above the thresholds.
Over the last two decades, modern statistical analysis has
been utilized to examine the metrics of the parameters of the
semen analysis. Most modern diagnostic tests are evaluated
by metrics such as sensitivity, speciﬁcity, positive and negative predictive values, and by receiver operating characteristic
curves. When individual semen parameters are analyzed,
what we ﬁnd is that they fair quite poorly; area under the
curve (AUC) for count, motility, and morphology are generally <0.7 which indicates the semen analysis is not very
robust assay when examining individual parameters (495).
Have the last 40 years of data shown us we should discard
the semen analysis as a test for male fertility? Until newer,
more robust tests are developed, the semen analysis still remains a critical component of the male evaluation. However,
what has also become apparent is that the more parameters
(count, motility, morphology) that are below thresholds, the
greater the chance of infertility. Over the last 40 years we
have come to realize that the semen analysis needs to be taken
for what it is: a set of multiple metrics that help evaluate the
male partner but should be used as part of, not as a complete
male evaluation. What we have gained over the years are
more robust well determined threshold limits.
The story of sperm morphology scoring encompasses at
least ﬁve different scoring systems developed over the last
ﬁfty years. All have struggled with deﬁning what is a normal
sperm and what is the threshold value of normal forms. In the
1960s, MacLeod promulgated a scoring system that focused
on evaluating sperm heads and grouping sperm into a variety
of abnormal categories with fertile men having at least 60%
normal forms. This data emanated from his semen data on
the fertile and infertile couples evaluated in his laboratory.
While this classiﬁcation system become the most commonly
utilized one from the 1960s to 1980s, one obvious limitation
of this approach is that tail and midpiece abnormalities, which
may cause infertility, were ignored in this system. The paradigm of this approach was that a sperm was considered
normal unless it ﬁt a deﬁned abnormal category. The early
editions of the WHO manual primarily used this type of
approach while adding tail and midpiece abnormalities as
categories. Despite the wide use of MacLeod type categorizations, experts frequently could not agree on what was a
normal sperm and as a result, thresholds were consensus
driven with much disagreement among experts. This was
apparent when the WHO changed the threshold from 60%
to 30% in the 3rd edition of the WHO in 1992; a change
that confused many people as it was not based on welldeﬁned data sets. A major paradigm shift occurred in the
late 1980s and early 1990s (496) when a group from South Africa reversed the long-held concept that sperm were normal
unless they ﬁt an abnormal category. They noticed that sperm
in the upper endocervical canal all had a similar appearance
and used these sperm to deﬁne normal with very precise
criteria. Sperm that did not ﬁt those criteria were classiﬁed
as abnormal. We then dropped from multiple categories of
sperm morphology to two: normal and abnormal. While to
some degree this approach simpliﬁed sperm morphology

scoring, it led to an unintended consequence, one technician’s
normal, was another’s abnormal. Survey results indicated a
wide variability in scoring among laboratory technicians.
The problem emanates from some of the natural subtle variations in the appearance of stained sperm heads. The classiﬁcation still required a line to be drawn between what was
normal variation and what was pathologic variation. To add
to the confusion, many technicians unknowingly move the
line and become stricter over time unless careful repeated
training and proﬁciency testing was incorporated into the
laboratory protocols.
With this new strict criteria, a lower threshold of the
fertile population needed to be deﬁned. While examination
of endocervical sperm helped deﬁne normal sperm
morphology, fertility data was needed to set a threshold.
The initial publications identiﬁed a 14% limit for normal
morphology based on pregnancy rates from IVF cycles.
Further analysis suggested a middle category of 4% to
14% of reduced but still good prognosis with <4% as having
a poor prognosis. While many IVF laboratories began utilizing this method and threshold, the data was often misinterpreted, and limitations not understood. The initial data was
from men with isolated sperm morphology defects (other parameters were normal). This did not represent the average
infertile male’s semen proﬁle. In addition, the outcome
was pregnancy by IVF, not intercourse. In the current 5th
edition WHO manual, which utilized data from analysis of
a large population of fertile men conceiving through intercourse, determined the lower one-sided 95% conﬁdence interval limit to be 4%. Interestingly while the initial data
using strict criteria came out of IVF, some IVF labs have
found little predictive value to sperm morphology and
with the advent of ICSI, morphology is not always predictive. This has led many to completely ignore sperm shape,
while others over interpret mild defects. Thus, with well
over 50 years of morphology scoring development, there remains much room for improvement in laboratory technique
and interpretation.
The standard semen analysis has been and remains a
labor-intensive assay. As computers evolved over the last
30 years, they have been applied to develop computer assisted
semen analysis equipment (CASA). These have primarily been
utilized to measure sperm density and motility. While early
enthusiasm envisioned CASA machines rapidly performing
clinical semen analyses in most laboratories, we have seen
only a small fraction of labs incorporate CASA machines
for clinical use. The machines offer the measurement of standard parameters as well as a whole variety of additional measurements such as straight line and curvilinear velocity.
Unfortunately, there is little evidence those parameters add
clinically useful information beyond what is obtained from
the manual measurement of parameters. Also, inaccurate
measurements of very low sperm densities have been a problem and the high cost was and remains prohibitive for many
labs. Current machines offer all standard semen parameters
while some also measure additional metrics such as
morphology, sperm DNA fragmentation and rates of the acrosome reaction. If ease of use improves, measurement of all parameters (including) morphology becomes standardized and

278
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
reproducible, and costs drop, we may see more utilization of
this interesting technology. Until then, the manual semen
analysis remains the gold standard—unless of course testing
moves out of the lab to be performed by home kits for use
by patients. We now have home kits to determine if sperm
counts are low and some utilize smart phone dongles and
apps and examine motile sperm counts. While these are not
made to replace the laboratory analysis and only measure
limited parameters, this technology is in its infancy and
only time will determine the limits of these innovative
approaches.
In the 1970s and 1980s, almost anyone could perform
semen analyses. In my residency, all residents performed
manual semen analyses in the clinic. We utilized manual,
mouth suction for pipettes—we did have a catch tube attached
with rubber tubing—and safety was generally not a concern
(HIV had only recently been reported), and there was nothing
remotely resembling proﬁciency testing. Although the Occupational Safety and Health Administration was established in
1971, it had clearly not made it to the sperm lab. Universal
precautions were not introduced until the mid-1980s when
the transmission of HIV and Hepatitis C became national
health concerns. The days of residents and medical students
performing diagnostic semen analyses ended with the introduction of CLIA 88—the Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Act of 1988. These regulations followed national concern
about lax laboratory standards reported in a Pulitzer Prize
winning 1987 article in the Wall Street Journal entitled
‘‘Lax laboratories: the Pap test misses much cervical cancer
through labs’ error—cut-rate ‘‘Pap mills’’ process slides using
screeners with incentive to rush—misplaced sense of security’’
(497).
While the semen analysis has remained a cornerstone in
the evaluation of the male, the limitations of the assay have
encouraged the development of alternative measures of
male fertility. This has lead to what are often called sperm
function assays—metrics that attempt to determine the
fertility potential of sperm based on the ability to perform biologic functions more closely linked to natural fertilization.
One of the ﬁrst functional assays, the post coital test, originated in the 1800s as mentioned above. To remove some of
the biologic variability of such an in vivo assay, variations
were developed to make this a more robust measurement of
pure male fertility. Thus, we have seen cervical mucus placed
in capillaries with sperm penetration depth measured. The
crossed mucus hostility assay utilized both patient and donor
sperm and patient and donor mucus to identify the source of
poor penetration. To completely remove the human female
partner from the equation, bovine cervical mucus was utilized
in another in vitro test. As with other functional assays, there
were contradictory reports of the correlation with IVF results—some reporting good correlation, others poor correlation. While the ability of sperm to penetrate cervical mucus
in vivo is clearly an important biologic function of in vivo
fertility, the value of in vitro testing has lost support since
many couples move to Intrauterine insemination (IUI) or
IVF/intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) if they fail to
conceive with intercourse regardless of the cervical mucus
test results.

Further innovation with sperm function assessment
brings us back to the beginnings of IVF when in 1976 the
zona free hamster oocyte penetration assay (SPA) was developed (498). It had been noted that sperm binding to the zona
pellucida was species speciﬁc. If the zona pellucida was
removed, human sperm could penetrate hamster ova and undergo nuclear decondensation. This required sperm to be
motile, be able to undergo hyperactivation, capacitation,
membrane fusion, and nuclear decondensation. This truly
measured a variety of actual sperm functions. The metric
that was measured was the percentage of ova penetrated or
the number of penetrated sperm per ova depending on the protocol utilized. Unfortunately, protocols often differed between
laboratories and the false positive and false negative rates
were inconsistent between protocols which limited the acceptance of this assay. However, it had been used for couples to
determine if they should proceed with IUI if the test was
normal or IVF, or ICSI if abnormal. The assay also gained
attention when tabloid newspapers reported that the assay
created hamster-human hybrids. This required clinicians to
be clear with patients that this was not the case, despite the evidence presented by pictures in the tabloids. Other functional
assays such as the hemizona assay were developed in the
1980s and 1990s. This particular technique measured the ability of sperm to bind to human zona pellucida; a process not
measured by the SPA. While data indicated it did help predict
IVF failure, issues such as access to human zona pellucida and
the technical requirement of splitting human zona in half, precluded widespread use of this assay. Most of these functional
assays went by the wayside with the development of ICSI
which bypassed most steps that these assays measured.
The last decade has seen the development of newer assays
such as testing for reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the measurement of sperm DNA fragmentation (SDF). Reactive oxygen species in small amounts are required for normal sperm
processes such as hyperactivation and sperm capacitation.
On the other hand, excess amounts of ROS can injure sperm
plasma membranes and cause fragmentation of sperm DNA.
There is a push and pull relationship between ROS production
and ROS neutralization by seminal and cytoplasmic antioxidants. When production exceeds antioxidant capacity a pathologic state exists called oxidative stress. Both seminal
leukocytes and immature spermatozoa produce ROS. It has
been clearly shown that semen from infertile men has more
ROS and oxidative stress than semen from fertile men. A variety of assays have been described to measure the amount of
ROS and the antioxidant capacity of semen. Proponents hope
this assay would identify patients in whom excess ROS is etiologic in their infertility and in whom treatment with oral antioxidants may reduce oxidative stress and improve
pregnancy rates. As we have seen with other assays, there
have been problems with lack of standardization between laboratories limiting the widespread acceptance of this assay. In
addition, additional studies of well-deﬁned populations with
pregnancy as an outcome are needed for further acceptance of
this approach. The limited evidence has not inhibited the marketing of multiple formulations of oral antioxidants, which
are primarily mixtures of vitamins and nutraceuticals, over
the internet to infertile couples. In 1980, the concept that

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
279
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
defective sperm chromatin structure was associated with
reduced fertility was described by Evenson et al. (499).
Thus, SDF testing was born. The measurement of the quality
of sperm chromatin has been approached by a variety of techniques the most common being by ﬂow cytometry, terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL), Comet, and sperm chromatin dispersion imaging.
Much data exists indicating higher SDF in infertile populations than fertile populations. In addition, lower pregnancy
rates by intercourse, IUI, and IVF, and higher miscarriage
rates have been reported in couples in which the male has
high rates of SDF. Interestingly the negative effect of elevated
SDF on ICSI outcomes is mild (and controversial). What is not
clear is why the effect of elevated SDF is muted with ICSI but
more prominent with other approaches to conception. Over
the last decade there have been multiple meta-analyses that
have examined the data, many pro and con articles, as well
as debates that discussed the value of the tests. While most
would agree that lots of sperm DNA fragmentation is not a
good thing, the role of these assays is still unclear with no
consensus on the indications for utilizing these assays in
the management of the infertile male. Currently the American
Society for Reproductive Medicine does not recommend SDF
testing as routinely indicated for infertile couples but suggests
that the results may be informative in individual cases.
While the history of the semen analysis starts in 1677, the
most changes have occurred over the last 40 years. As societal
disapproval of analysis of semen was left in the past, techniques have been reﬁned and standardized while thresholds
better deﬁned using modern statistical methods. We have
also seen criticism of the value of the semen analysis
continue. What has become clear is that it is not a perfect
test for male fertility; it has many ﬂaws, and many detractors.
This has led to the development of a variety of other approaches to the analysis of sperm. Some, such as the SPA
and hemizona assays are quietly resting in peace, having
been abandoned by most laboratories. Others such as SDF
testing remain hotly debated and continue to undergo reﬁnements. However, of all the advancements that have occurred,
the semen analysis, ﬂaws and all, remains the only test that is
indicated and recommended as part of the male evaluation for
all couples. Careful examination of van Leeuwenhoek’s animalcules has stood the test of time.

ADVANCES IN DECISION MAKING
FOR THE EVALUATION OF
AZOOSPERMIA IN THE MODERN
AND POST-MODERN ERA
Richard A Schoor, M.D.
Ever since the ﬁrst embryo was created in the lab using in vitro
fertilization (IVF) and later intracytoplasmic sperm injection
(ICSI) the entire approach to management of the azoospermic
male has changed. Prior to the advent of these amazing technologies, men with uncorrectable azoospermia were told to
adopt or to use donor sperm. Now, in the current era, telling

a couple after a only a basic evaluation that they should simply
use donor sperm or to adopt can be considered mean and uncaring and couples given this advice will often seek second
opinions from urologists who are more willing to explore alternatives and pursue the most cutting edge management for
azoospermia. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection, which requires only one sperm, in contrast to standard IVF which requires 10,000 or greater numbers of motile sperm, has
particularly revolutionized the management of the most hopeless male fertility cases, because with ICSI, so long as the urologist could ﬁnd just one sperm, even an a-motile one, the
couple could have a biological child of their own. All of the
sudden the game changed completely with no folliclestimulating hormone level too high, no testis too small, no genetic anomaly unsurmountable (500). However, this is not
exactly true as certain deletions on the AZF locus are associated with total absence of sperm within the testis. In addition,
the diagnostic testicular biopsy, in the minds of a few progressive urologists and followed by an increasing number, became
superﬂuous and unnecessary, and men were increasingly being counseled to undergo sperm retrieval surgery followed by
ICSI and to forego the intermediary step of diagnostic biopsy.
The only problem with this approach was that in at least
50% of cases of idiopathic azoospermia, cases in which an
obvious cause for obstruction was not apparent, no sperm
found on testicular sperm extraction (TESE), and in the case
of a TESE done in conjunction with a fresh egg retrieval, the
couples would have undergone an IVF/ICSI attempt for, in
the words of some patients, nothing. Coming out of a procedure room after a negative attempt at locating sperm on TESE is
very unpleasant. Delivering such news to the hopeful couple is
stressful to any caring urologist and devastating to the couple
emotionally and often ﬁnancially. Many urologists who practice advanced male infertility, such as myself, have spent
entire careers reﬁning our crafts just to avoid whifﬁng on
sperm retrieval procedures. Thankfully, because of improved
use of routine clinical data; improved ultrasound imaging
and diagnosis; genetic diagnosis and counseling; data science/information technology; advanced surgical innovations
and operative microscopy; sperm cryopreservation; and current concepts of informed consent and shared medical decision making, male infertility specialists whiff with much less
frequency and have patients with high sperm retrieval and
pregnancy rates and, for those we cannot help, few patient regrets regarding evaluations and treatments neither tried nor
discussed. These advances are detailed in this article.

Background
Azoospermia can result from blockages of the ductal system.
When this occurs, the azoospermia is classiﬁed as obstructive
azoospermia (OA). The cause of the majority of OA cases can
be determined by history and physical examination alone,
with history of prior vasectomy among the most common etiologies. Other conditions that can be determined on readily
available clinical evidence include vasal obstruction from
prior hernia repair, with or without mesh, congenital vasal
agenesis, prior extirpative pelvic surgery, or ejaculatory
duct obstruction.

280
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
When the testicles don’t produce sperm at all or they do
not produce sperm cells in sufﬁcient number to get into the
ejaculate, it is classiﬁed as nonobstructive azoospermia
(NOA). Common conditions that cause NOA includes current
or prior usage of exogenous testosterone, history of undescended testes, history of malignancy and chemotherapy,
current malignancy, genetic anomalies, environmental exposures, and pituitary dysfunction, among others.
The importance of differentiating OA from NOA is that
sperm retrieval techniques are always successful in locating
sperm from OA patients, but locating sperm from NOA patients is challenging in the best circumstances and can be
impossible in some. In order for the urologist to give good
advice to his patient/couple, it is vitally important to accurately differentiate OA from NOA and for those with NOA,
to be able to give the patient a reasonable probability of a successful retrieval. Armed with the advice, patients can decide
what is best.

Advances in our use of routine clinical data
Under the care of any competent male infertility specialist, the
etiology of a man’s azoospermia can be diagnosed using little
more than clinical data derived by a comprehensive history
and physical examination with routine laboratory conﬁrmation. In many patients, the etiology of a man’s infertility is
clear within minutes of meeting the patient and eliciting a
history. All that is needed in such cases is conﬁrmatory physical ﬁndings and diagnostic testing. In fact, the male infertility clinical evaluation can be considered checklist-like
and all that the urologist needs to do is to identify items on
the list. A well-designed electronic health record template
can help. Table 11 lists the pertinent clinical data than can
be used to differentiate one category of azoospermia from
another in the majority of patients.
Endocrine evaluation. The blood tests most likely to add
diagnostic information are the gonadotropin levels, folliclestimulating hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH).
Testosterone, while not very useful as an isolated test, is helpful in relation to FSH, LH, prolactin, and estradiol levels in
determining the overall healthy function of the male reproductive gonadal-pituitary system. Analyses of FSH and LH
levels, in and of themselves, have been shown to differentiate
OA from NOA with a high degree of accuracy. With only
testicular long axis and FSH/LH data, Schoor et al. (500)
demonstrated that one could predict OA versus NOA with
>95% accuracy. Of course, in clinical practice one has access
to much more data than just FSH/LH and testicular long axis.
Semen analysis. Azoospermia is diagnosed by the lack of
sperm cells in at least two properly prepared and centrifuged
semen samples. While a semen analysis is, in most cases, a
crude indicator of a man’s fertility potential, the consistent
ﬁnding of total absence of sperm on multiple analyses indicates that the man is 100% infertile. Semen parameters such
as pH, semen volume, and the presence/absence of fructose
add additional and useful clinical data. Clinical and endocrine
data, will also establish a diagnosis of OA versus NOA in
>90% of cases. Compared to other urologic conditions,

such as prostate cancer diagnosis, urologic pain disorders,
and others, this small degree of diagnostic uncertainty is actually pretty impressive. Use of additional tools improves accuracy even more.

Improved imaging technology
Ultrasound. Ultrasound has come a long way since the early
1990s when I was a medical student at the University of Pennsylvania and my radiology professor described abdominal ultrasound as ‘‘looking at the weather over Chicago.’’ Resolution
was so poor as to virtually be useless to all but the most skilled
sonologists. In the early 1990s testicular ultrasound had
limited utility and the major debate at that time was whether
or not it could be used to reliably determine if the testis has
vascular ﬂow. As ultrasound quality improved and became
more ubiquitous, male infertility specialists starting detecting
non-palpable testis tumors and varicoceles. Now what to do?!
This forced clinician-researchers to determine the clinical signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings.
Current ultrasound technology has become quite impressive in terms of resolution, Doppler and Power Doppler ﬂow
and wave-form analysis. Now, super-high frequency probes
exist that can resolve individual seminiferous tubules and
peri-tubular blood vessels and some urologists suggest that
pockets of sperm production tend to be near such vascular
areas (American Urological Association [AUA] Basic Ultrasound Course). Moreover, the cost of high quality sonographic
units has come down and is now affordable to private, and
even solo, practice urologists for use at the point of care. Having the ability to perform an ultrasound oneself, as an extension of the physical exam, enables the urologist to
immediately relay information to the patient and investigate
ﬁndings real-time, as needed, and very efﬁciently. Finally,
current ultrasound images are stored digitally and the information embedded in the ﬁles will likely, in the near future,
to be available for datamining.
Though AUA best practice guidelines for the evaluation
of azoospermic male do not recommend the routine use of ultrasound, this inexpensive, readily available, and safe study
can improve diagnostic accuracy and change management
for men with azoospermia (501). While the aim of this article
is not to argue that ultrasound should or should not be
routinely performed in men with azoospermia, information
obtained by ultrasound can certainly be useful in differentiating between OA and NOA (502).
Testis measurements such as long axis length, width, and
height are easily determined by ultrasound and from these
measurements, volume can be accurately determined. Though
using an orchidometer is certainly a less expensive way to
measure testis volume, the ultrasound can measure volume
as accurately, if not more so, because orchidometers rely
upon best estimation by the clinician and not all clinicians
are equally experienced in their use. Since the majority of a
testicle’s mass is comprised of seminiferous tubules, as
opposed to Leydig cells, small testicles are more generally
consistent with disorders of sperm production rather than
obstruction (503, 504).

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
281
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

TABLE 11
Clinical risk factors for obstructive azoospermia and nonobstructive azoospermia.
OA
Prior vasectomy
Prior Hernia
Vasal agenesis
FSH/LH between 3 and 7.5
Dilated SV
Midline prostate cyst
Hx CF
Fhx CF
NOA
History TRT
Testicular atrophy
FSH/LH >7.6
Prior malignancy
Hx chemotherapy
Heterogeneous parenchyma
on sonogram
Hx UDT
MicroY +
Abnl karyotype

STI history
Dilated ejaculatory duct

Decreased intratesticular
vascular ﬂow
Pituitary dysfunction

Testis LA >4cm
Dilated rete testes
Testis mass
Hx of torsion

Note: CF ¼ cystic ﬁbrosis; FSH ¼ follicle-stimulating hormone; Fhx ¼ family history; Hx ¼ history; LA ¼ long axis; LH ¼ luteinizing hormone; NOA ¼ nonobstructive azoospermia; OA ¼ obstructive
azoospermia; STI ¼ sexually transmitted infection; TRT ¼ testosterone replacement therapy; UDT ¼ undescended testicle.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

Tumors may be found in 4% of men who present to the
fertility center for evaluation and ﬁfty percent of men with
testis cancer are infertile/subfertile at the time of diagnosis
(505). While the majority of testis tumors can be detected
on physical exam, not all can, and an occult tumor can be
associated with oligo and azoospermia, and of course occult
tumors can also be malignant. Ultrasound is a great imaging
modality for testicular parenchyma but, as the argument goes,
it may be too good. Many of these occult tumors are benign
and detecting one puts the patient at risk for unnecessary surgery, including orchiectomy at worst and testicular biopsy at
best, and it always leads to anxiety of health in all affected individuals. However, for the purposes of detecting testis tumors that may be contributing to a man’s azoospermia
condition, occult or otherwise, ultrasound is useful.
Varicoceles are associated with male infertility and abnormalities in sperm production and function. Very few
men with varicoceles as an isolated ﬁnding are azoospermic
and clinically signiﬁcant varicoceles are, by deﬁnition,
palpable on physical exam. As such, the presence of a varicocele, clinical or subclinical, on ultrasound does not in and of
itself add much useful information in the differentiation of
OA from NOA. However, as part of a constellation of ﬁndings,
conﬁrming their presence on ultrasound has value.
Tubular ectasia is a dramatic sonographic ﬁnding of
cystic dilation of the rete testes. This is a benign condition
and its presence has been postulated to be associated with
epididymal obstruction (506). The rete testes can be seen in
proxy form by estimating the width of the mediastinum testis,
which can be easily seen on ultrasound. Mediastinal testis
width as a predictor of obstruction in men with persistent
azoospermia post vasovasostomy is under investigation at
present.
The epididymis is readily imaged on ultrasound and
epididymal pathology can easily be determined. As the
normal thickness of a human epididymal head is in the 78 mm range, enlargement can be an indication of an
obstructive etiology (507). Missing segments of the epididymis or total absence of the epididymis on ultrasound suggest an obstructive etiology as well. Solid tumors of the
epididymis, though rare, would also suggest an obstructive
etiology.

Ultrasound is a great study to determine the vascularity
and ﬂow within the testicular parenchyma. Ultrasound with
Doppler ﬂow can be useful not just for the detection of torsion, but it can also be useful to determine whether or not a
testis has suffered a prior vascular incident such as torsion
or as a result of a severe infection. As genital tract infection
can also cause epididymal obstruction, one must use the totality of ultrasound ﬁndings, rather than a singular ﬁnding, to be
of use of differentiating OA from NOA. Findings of diffusely
heterogeneous parenchyma with low testicular volume and
low but present Doppler ﬂow are indicative of an unhealthy
testicle as opposed to a healthy but obstructed testicle (508).
Transrectal ultrasonography. Transrectal prostate sonography is an important tool in the evaluation of men with azoospermia. Information learned from this readily available study
can be used in conjunction with that learned elsewhere to
maximize diagnostic differentiation of OA versus NOA. Ejaculatory duct obstruction is an unusual and difﬁcult-todiagnose disorder characterized by low volume, acidic ejaculate and oligo, and on occasion, azoospermia. On transrectal
ultrasonography one can often, but by no means always,
see dilated seminal vesicles and a dilated ejaculatory duct.
While there are no absolutely diagnostic features for this condition, when a patient has enough ﬁndings, obstruction is
likely. Such ﬁndings include midline prostatic cyst, dilation
of the seminal vesical, and seminal vesical agenesis.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has little role in the evaluation of
male infertility in general and azoospermia in speciﬁc.
Perhaps the only time to order such a test is in cases of suspected ejaculatory duct obstruction, though even this is
debatable. Magnetic resonance imaging offers little additional information over transrectal ultrasonography, at least
information that is clinically useful, and MRI is an expensive
test that is very difﬁcult to obtain from an insurance authorization perspective, as a purely pragmatic matter. If ejaculatory duct obstruction is suspected, rather than get an MRI,
perhaps seminal vesicle aspiration is a more direct approach
that will yield greater diagnostic information and potentially
enable retrieval of viable sperm and their cryopreservation
(509).

282
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
Genetic diagnosis and counseling
Advances in genetic diagnosis has signiﬁcantly impacted decision making for men with azoospermia. These tests are now
readily available in most commercial diagnostic labs and are
usually covered by insurance. Any man with azoospermia
who does not have a clear reason for the azoospermia, such
as prior vasectomy or use of exogenous testosterone, ought
to have genetic evaluations that include karyotype determination, genetic evaluation of the Y-chromosome, and a cystic
ﬁbrosis panel, per the AUA best practice guidelines for the
evaluation of the azoospermic male (500). The presence of
one or another genetic defect will make the diagnosis. Men
with 47-XXY (Kleinfelter) will be NOA, while men with cystic
ﬁbrosis mutations are OA. The presence of a Y chromosome
micro-deletion indicates NOA. In addition, certain deletions
of the AZF region are associated with absence of sperm on
advanced sperm retrieval procedures and these men should
never be offered surgical sperm retrieval surgery (509). Genetic diagnosis has been a major advance in the evaluation
of azoospermia since sperm can always be found in OA patients yet not always in NOA patients. In addition, the presence of deletion on the AZF B locus is 100% predictive of
the absence of sperm anywhere within the testes. No other
diagnostic blood test or imaging study can predict whether
sperm can be found within the testes, even when given a thorough surgical search.
One additional item ought to be discussed in regards to
genetic diagnosis. Prior to the advent of ICSI, such genetic abnormalities were never passed onto offspring. This is no
longer the case and any genetic defect in sperm can be transmitted to the embryo. Couples must be counseled accordingly
even though few couples refuse to proceed with assisted
reproductive technology upon learning about transmissibility. In addition, preimplantation genetic diagnosis, testing
the embryo for the presence of a gene, has become routinely
available, even in community IVF centers, and armed with
this information, the couple can decide which embryo to
implant.

Data science and information technology
Electronic health records (EHR) have been touted by many
physicians as the bane of their existences and in studies
on physician burnout, forced use of EHR technology is
high on the list of causes of burnout, based on many physician survey studies. Physicians complain that EHR usage
gets in the way of making eye contact with patients and impedes fostering a good doctor patient relationship. This was
certainly true in my experience in 2000, when as a chief
resident at the Chicago Lakeside VA Medical Center, an unhappy patient wrote a letter to my chairman stating, ‘‘Dr.
Schoor entered the room, introduced himself, immediately
went to the computer began typing then told me to drop
my pants and bend over.’’ (Guilty as charged!). In addition
to impacting communication between doctor and patient,
many physicians cannot get through, in a timely manner,
patient encounters due to all the clicking involved in documenting them. Enter the newest member of the medical
work-force, the scribe.

The EHR is not all bad and, in my own opinion, the EHR
might just be the best single advance in medicine in modern
times! Electronic health records make datamining possible
and possible at levels never before seen in world history.
While EHR use results in legible documentation, fewer prescription errors, and efﬁciencies in billing and coding, it is
the conversion of data from paper to digital that is the most
important feature of EHR technology. Having a comprehensive male fertility history template in a check box fashion,
or a similar one, as part of the EHR requires that the physician
(or scribe) capture each and every pertinent item in the
comprehensive male infertility assessment (Table 11). Not
only that, all laboratory data and radiographic imaging data
is now in digital format and accessible. Data captured in
this way is granular and accessible for research. Multiply
this by thousands of male fertility specialists in the U.S. alone
and tens of thousands worldwide, and one can see that opportunity for big data research is awesome indeed.
While the majority of urologists have electronic medical
records these EHR systems are disparate and not interconnected. Such Tower of Babel lack of interoperability has
been a problem in the past but not so much anymore. Data
from such disparate systems is already visible and readable
on clearinghouses and other web-based data repositories.
As such, datamining is possible and currently being performed in research settings. The AUA Quality Registry Program (AQUA) is a software system embeddable in almost
any electronic health record software system and it can map
any type data, whether it be in discreet, granular form or
even if non-granular. Data can be aggregated and is currently
being used for research purposes (510, 511).
Watson is a very sophisticated cognitive computing system that has a number of applications in a variety of industries, including health care. Using IBM’s Watson,
researchers are to perform medical research by analyzing
data on a scale never before seen (512). Watson can access
any digital data and analyze for patterns not apparent or
obvious to human intelligence. In the culinary world, Watson
is creating novel recipes that have been tested on human taste
buds with good results. These very powerful tools may result
in signiﬁcant progress in our capability to predict noninvasively whether or not a man has OA or NOA and hopefully it will be able to predict with high probability that sperm
will be present and retrievable in an NOA testicle. It is only
matter of time until Watson, or something like it, will be
able to guide the urologist caring for an azoospermic male.

Advanced surgical innovations and
operative microscopy
The two innovations detailed below have made negative
sperm retrievals, if not a thing of the past, certainly less
frequent of an occurrence. Most couples, in my own 17year experience, want to know that everything that could
be done medically has been done and only then can I refer
them to donor sperm or adoption. This does mean that donor
sperm or adoption are never mentioned earlier in the process,
because they are mentioned, but it is that couples are not
willing to realistically accept them as viable alternatives until

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
283
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
a thorough evaluation has been done. The testicular ﬁne needle aspiration (TFNA) mapping and microdissection testicular
sperm aspiration (TESA) are options for these very couples. At
urology and fertility meetings that I have attended, Paul Turek
and Peter Schlegel, the pioneers of the two innovations that
will be discussed, have debated in open forum that one technique is better than the other. Nonsense! The TFNA mapping
and testicular microdissection are complementary and when
used appropriately and with expertise have enabled previously unattainable success rates for sperm retrievals and
ICSI and thousands of couples to have babies that otherwise
could not have done so. Absolutely incredible.
TFNA mapping is a diagnostic ofﬁce-based procedure
popularized by Turek et al. (513). The procedure, which will
not be described here, is performed in an ofﬁce setting under
perivasal cord block. Critics of TFNA mapping state that it is a
diagnostic-only-procedure, and as such, it does not directly
improve the couple’s ability to get pregnant. Committing a
man to a TFNA mapping means that he might have one unnecessary procedure at worst, in the case of a mapping that
shows no sperm, and at best he will need to have at least
one, if not more than one, invasive procedures to harvest
that sperm. The TFNA mapping is invasive itself and can
result in injury and, at least in theory, loss of the testicle
due to vascular injury. Proponents report that the TFNA mapping is quick for the patient, very well tolerated, and with little, but not zero, risk. Finding sperm on a TFNA mapping
almost guarantees that sperm will be found in sufﬁcient
quantity to use for reproductive purposes during a future
TESE. In addition, the approximate geographic location of
that sperm can be determined in advanced of a TESE, thus
improving the efﬁciency of the TESE. In cases where no sperm
is found on TFNA mapping, the couple can be counseled in
advance that proceeding to standard TESE is ill-advised and
that they would beneﬁt either from testicular microdissection
(mTESE) by a qualiﬁed doctor in a capable center or that they
ought to proceed with donor sperm. This is perhaps the greatest advantage to the TFNA mapping: it can be done by community urologists with advanced fertility training yet they do
not have access to reproductive endocrinology centers that
are equipped to or are willing to handle mTESE and all that
mTESE requires so that it can routinely be successful (514).
Testicular microdissection, mTESE, as developed by
Schlegel, has been a revolutionary innovative technique that
has enabled men with the most severe defects in sperm production to become biological fathers. While the details of
the mTESE will not be discussed here, the essence of the
mTESE involves making an extensive transverse opening of
the tunica albuginea of the testis to expose all areas of seminiferous tubules for inspection under high power operative
microsurgery, like turning a sock inside-out. Critics of the
mTESE state that the very nature of the procedure puts the
testes at risk for devascularization and permanent damage,
though, at least in the hands of Schlegel and other experienced
centers, this has not been found to be a signiﬁcant problem
(515). The main problem with mTESE is that it requires a signiﬁcant and extensive level of expertise and infrastructure
from not just the urologist but also from the REI centers and
their embryology staff. As a result, mTESE is not practical in

many community settings, such as my own. Many patients
with severe male factor conditions who lack the ﬁnancial resources to get advanced reproductive care from mTESE centers
of excellence cannot beneﬁt from this procedure.
Sperm cryopreservation. The ability to reliably cryopreserve,
store, and thaw sperm and then to show that the cryopreservedthawed sperm function just as well as fresh sperm when used
for IVF and ICSI has had an enormous impact on the management of azoospermic males. Prior to 2000, most reproductive
endocrinology and infertility (REI) centers did not feel
comfortable working with frozen-thawed sperm as they felt
it would decrease their fertilization and pregnancy rates.
They favored fresh sperm. Fortunately, ample research has
demonstrated that fresh and frozen-thawed sperm from any
source, ejaculated, testis, or epididymal, perform equally well
in terms of fertilization and pregnancy rates for ICSI (516).
While some REI centers still prefer to use fresh sperm, most
have become quite adept at handling frozen-thawed sperm.
So why is this so important? There are several problems
with using fresh sperm exclusively. One, demanding that the
urologist be on-call for sperm retrieval is just not practical
from a scheduling perspective. The fact that a woman may
ovulate any day of the week does not work out well for a
busy urologist’s clinic or surgical schedule. Use of frozen and
thawed sperm is perfectly okay for most circumstances, except,
perhaps, for severe NOA cases in which sperm harvest may be
so limited that no one is willing to risk any loss of sperm in the
freeze-thaw cycle. Two, by using cryopreserved sperm, couples
know going into the egg retrieval that they have sperm that can
be thawed and used for fertilization. Three, multiple cryovials
can be processed and stored, even in severe NOA cases, and
thawed as needed, one by one, so that men rarely need to undergo more than one surgical sperm retrieval procedure. Four,
cryopreservation of sperm is inexpensive as it costs several
hundred U.S. dollars per year. Five, sperm can remain frozen
for decades and be thawed as if nothing happened, like Rip
Van Winkle, so long as they remained submerged in liquid nitrogen or within the vapor, undisturbed, at minus 196 C and
the laboratory makes sure the levels of liquid nitrogen in the
tanks remain adequate and monitored.
Informed consent and medical decision making. The 1990s
saw a major change in how physicians spoke to and counseled
patients; prior to the late 1980s/early 1990s, doctors said and
patients did. There was a paternalistic attitude that doctor
knew best and told patients what to do. I started medical
school 1990 and we were taught differently, such as medical
decision making was a joint process between patient and doctor; shared medical decision making. A patient’s beliefs, desires, fears, biases, education levels, and ethics must be
incorporated into a treatment plan, within reason. Such
teaching became the norm in medical education by the early
1990s. Though not without problems of its own, shared decision making has had a major and a positive impact on the
management of azoospermia.
The discussion between doctor and couple on how to proceed when faced with azoospermia is not a simple one. Many
factors must be considered, such as the couple’s ethical and
religious directives; their ﬁnancial and insurance issues;

284
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
concerns over success and failure rates; experience of the
urologist and the REI center; feelings about donor sperm
and adoption; concerns over complications and pain; and
so on. The decision is certainly not, azoospermia then biopsy
followed by TESE, but is much more involved with many decision points. Do we do TFNA mapping or mTESE or standard
TESE etc., also do we obtain diagnostic tests such as endocrine
proﬁles and genetic evaluation and imaging? Having a onesized-ﬁts-all approach is not acceptable and can create significant harm to patients, including ﬁnancial harm, even bankruptcy, and yet not get the couple any closer toward having a
child. The decision must be a shared one indeed.

The future
This article has discussed the most signiﬁcant advances in the
past 50 or so years but we are really just starting. While the
urologist’s role in the management of azoospermia will remain
important, it will change, as everything ultimately does.
Replacement of urologists by artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is unlikely in the near future though not impossible. However, what
will likely happen is that AI will advance to the point of being
useful to urologists caring for azoospermic men. In such a system, the urologist obtains all clinical data in an electronic
format, as she does now, but she will submit the data to AI
analysis. Probabilities will be calculated and location of sperm
pre-determined. In nanoseconds, an AI can scour the individual’s data, held in any digital environment, and compare it to
data published in any journal or study or even any big data
system (AQUA, registries, etc.), and then give a probability
on likelihood of one diagnosis versus another and whether
or not a TESE ought to be attempted. This is already functional
and operational in the medical ﬁeld (The Medical Futurist,
http://bit.ly/2rw0nr5) and in other industries, such as recipe
development (Watson) and is only a matter of time before it
comes to ours. A health system, entity, or individual would
own, or more probably license the use of such an AI. One
can choose to ﬁght AI or to embrace it like any other tool
and use it to more effectively help men with azoospermia get
the right treatment. Exciting times indeed.

Summary
Adequate decision making in any endeavor requires access to
accurate data and then good, high quality science and
evidence-based interpretation of that data. The ﬁeld of male
infertility is data-rich and this has allowed clinicians to
make tremendous advances in the evaluation and management of the infertile male. Within male infertility, the greatest
strides have been made, in this author’s opinion, in the areas
discussed above. Moreover, as we are at the dawn of data science, cognitive computing, and artiﬁcial intelligence, perhaps
this is most exciting time to be involved in the care of these
men, whether it be at the level of the bench or the bed. Perhaps
not-so-distant future, a human decision maker will be either
replaced or more likely augmented by advanced computing
and AI. Use of advanced cognitive computing and artiﬁcial
intelligence will only serve to augment the clinician’s
decision-making. Urologist can choose to ignore the technology, to ﬁght it, or to embrace it.

MICROSURGICAL CORRECTION OF
VARICOCELES AND OBSTRUCTIVE
AZOOSPERMIA: HISTORICAL AND
CURRENT CLINICAL PERSPECTIVE
Marc Goldstein, M.D. and
Larry I. Lipshultz, M.D.
Start by doing what's necessary; then do what's possible; and
suddenly you are doing the impossible.—Francis of Assisi
The ﬁrst compound microscopes are attributed to the
Dutch spectacle makers Hans Jansen, Zacharias Jansen, and
Hans Lippershey. In the 1590s these inventors discovered
that objects could be magniﬁed using elongated telescope
tubes. While during the late 19th century surgeons used
magniﬁcation to help in tissue dissection, it was not until
1912 that the Zeiss Company introduced a relatively light
binocular set of operating loupes worn like glasses. In 1923,
the Leitz Company manufactured a prismatic loupe, which
permitted beam splitting that allowed assistants to share the
same view as the surgeon, thus facilitating teaching of surgical technique and photographic image capture. In 1921, an
otolarynologist named Carl Olof Nylen was the ﬁrst surgeon
to use a microscope in the operating room by using a monocular microscope rather than loupes. In 1946, the American
ophthalmologist Richard Perritt borrowed a binocular operative microscope from his otorhinolaryngologist colleague for
use during an eye operation. Subsequently, in the 1960s, as
use of microsurgical techniques became widespread, surgeons
innovatively improved existing surgical instruments to facilitate microsurgical approaches to a broader variety of operations. Needles and sutures were miniaturized by Swiss
manufacturers under the indispensable inﬂuence of an orthopedic hand surgeon, Robert Acland. These surgeon-driven advances, along with the development of ﬁber optics, bipolar
electrocautery, xenon lamps, and variable magniﬁcation microscopes have collectively maneuvered microsurgical approaches into mainstream use and improved patient
outcomes.
The role of the operating microscope and microsurgery
instrumentation has gained increased importance in urology
over the past 30 to 40 years, especially as it pertains to both
varicocele repair and vasectomy reversals. Herein we address
these two procedures from a historical perspective, identify
current state-of-the-art technical innovations and, importantly, describe the role of the varicocele repair in the era of
in vitro fertilization with intracytoplasmic sperm injection
(IVF/ICSI). Operative correction of the varicocele, when present, is by far the most common procedure for treating male
infertility.

Historical advances in urologic microsurgery
In 1979, Silber reported a case of irreversible azoospermia due
to testicular artery ligation at the time of conventional varicocelectomy, and suggested that this was due to inability to
identify testicular arteries without magniﬁcation (517). In
1983, Wosnitzer and Roth suggested use of optical

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
285
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
magniﬁcation and Doppler ultrasound to identify arteries
during varicocelectomy, but did not present a technique or
any cases. In 1985 at the Ferdinand C. Valentine Urology
Essay Contest of the New York Academy of Medicine, Dr.
Marc Goldstein’s microsurgical artery and lymphaticsparing technique for varicocelectomy using an inguinal
approach was ﬁrst presented by his resident, Jack Dwosh. In
1985, Joel Marmar and colleagues described a microsurgical
subinguinal approach to varicocelectomy in 71 men. In addition to ligation, Marmar utilized injection of a sclerosing
agent to occlude small veins (518). By allowing magniﬁed,
clear visualization of all spermatic cord vessels, selective ligation of veins with artery and lymphatic sparing could be
achieved, resulting in excellent outcomes with lower recurrence and complication rates than non-microsurgical approaches. Goldstein et al. (519) reported 640 cases in 429
men in 1992 employing microsurgical inguinal varicocelectomy with delivery of the testis, facilitating acceptance of
microsurgical varicocele repair as the standard of optimal surgical correction.

Current state-of-the-art surgical innovations
Whether one uses an inguinal or subinguinal approach remains surgeon’s choice, since outcome superiority studies of
each technique have had inconsistent conclusions. Orhan
and colleagues (520) retrospectively evaluated these new
operative approaches: 82 microsurgical inguinal varicocelectomies and 65 subinguinal cases. The authors reported no signiﬁcant difference between the two groups in operative time,
semen improvement, or pregnancy rate, although the number
of veins and arteries was higher in the subinguinal group.
Goldstein reports that delivery of the testis provides direct visual access to every possible route of venous return, and in
over 4,000 cases done by one of the authors (M.G.), the failure
rate was <1% with minimal morbidity (521). Interestingly, in
another much smaller non-randomized, retrospective study
from the same institution, the results of microsurgical
inguinal varicocelectomy with (N¼55) and without (N¼110)
testis delivery were compared (522). At 1 year, the pregnancy
rate was 40.0% for those with delivery and 55.0% for those
without delivery. Finally, open microsurgical varicocelectomy has demonstrated lower recurrence rates and fewer
complications, compared with laparoscopic or a high retroperitoneal approach, including a lower incidence of hydrocele
formation (523).
One author (L.I.L.) has found several intraoperative
techniques to be of signiﬁcant beneﬁt. The use of ﬁnetipped Gerald forceps allows for atraumatic grasping of
veins for ligation. Permanent suture (i.e., 4-0 silk or microvascular clips) is essential to occlude the veins. Teasing the
veins away from surrounding structures is facilitated with
ﬁne-tipped Jacobson clamps (ASSI) or the same microneedle holders used for vasovasostomy (ASSI.B138). Identiﬁcation of the internal spermatic arteries is greatly facilitated by using a micro-tipped Doppler (VTI Instruments),
consisting of a 1mm tip and a zero white noise ampliﬁer.
These nuances of instrumentation can help with either surgical approach.

The role of the varicocele repair in the era of
assisted reproductive technology
Although many couples attempt IVF/ICSI, despite the husband having identiﬁable varicoceles, there are reasons, albeit
somewhat controversial, for varicocele repair in the era of
IVF/ICSI. In the early days of assisted reproductive technology (ART), Ashkenazi et al. (524) studied the effect of spermatic vein ligation on successful IVF and embryo transfer.
This study evaluated 22 infertile couples who failed IVF. In
each, the male partner had suboptimal semen quality and a
varicocele. All male partners underwent varicocele repair
before a subsequent IVF attempt. Postoperatively, the embryos showed statistically signiﬁcant improvements in fertilization and cleavage rates as well as a 20% pregnancy rate
(P<0.01).
More recently, Esteves et al. (525) evaluated 242 infertile
men with varicoceles undergoing IVF/ICSI. Prior to IVF, 80
(group I) underwent subinguinal microsurgical varicocele
repair; the remaining 162 (group II) had an untreated varicocele present at the time of IVF/ICSI. Postoperatively, signiﬁcant changes were noted between groups I and II in mean
sperm density (34.9 vs. 10.6, P%.01) and motile sperm count
(15.4 vs. 5.1, P%.01). Pregnancy and live birth outcomes also
favored varicocele repair with an odds ratio (OR) of 1.82 (95%
conﬁdence interval [CI]: 1.06-3.15, P¼ .03) for pregnancy and
an OR of 1.87 (95% CI: 1.08-3.25, P¼ .03) for live births. There
was also a statistically signiﬁcant decrease in rate of miscarriage after varicocele repair (OR: 0.433, 95% CI: 0.22-0.84,
P¼ .01).
Daitch et al. (526) retrospectively examined the effect of
varicocele repair in the setting of intrauterine insemination
(IUI). In a study of 58 infertile couples, 24 underwent 63
IUIs without treatment of varicoceles. The remaining 34
were treated with varicocelectomy and underwent 101 IUI cycles. When pre-wash semen parameters were examined, only
the percentage of motile sperm was signiﬁcantly different between the treatment and non-treatment groups (38.1 vs. 48.6,
P¼ .02). In the treated cohort, there were 12 (32.4%) pregnancies that resulted in 12 (32.4%, P¼ .01) live births. In contrast,
only four (16.7%) pregnancies were recorded in the untreated
group resulting in one (4.2%) live birth. After controlling for
variables known to affect outcomes, the study showed that
varicocele repair increased the odds of pregnancy by 4.4fold. Matthews and Goldstein ﬁrst reported induction of spermatogenesis and pregnancy after microsurgical varicocelectomy in men with nonobstructive azoospermia. Over 50%
of men had appearance of motile sperm in the ejaculate
adequate for IVF/ICSI.
Kirby et al. (527) should be commended on their detailed
meta-analysis addressing the impact on pregnancy and livebirth rates for both oligospermic and azoospermic men undergoing varicocele repair before ART. The authors demonstrated
improved outcomes for both IUI and IVF (OR of 8.36 and 1.76,
respectively). The authors also illustrated that both men with
low sperm counts and those requiring testicular sperm extraction did indeed beneﬁt from a varicocele repair even in instances where ART is still required. These ﬁndings
underscore the importance of a formal urologic evaluation

286
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
for such men and the opportunity to diagnose and treat a
varicocele.
In the era of ICSI, however, it is unclear how many of
these men with varicoceles are referred to male infertility specialists. The study by Kirby et al. (527) described some of the
lost opportunities and foregone beneﬁts associated with circumventing a complete male evaluation. Finally, it is clear
that varicocele can have a detrimental effect on Leydig cell
function as well as spermatogenesis, and repair improves
serum testosterone, as well as sperm quality.

Treatment of obstructive azoospermia
The ﬁrst description of microsurgical vasovasostomy was by
Fernandes, Shah, and Draper, published in the Journal of
Urology in 1968 in dogs (528). They reported successful anastomoses in 19 of 20 using the microscope compared to 10 failures out of 12 non-microscopic anastomoses using wire
splints. The ﬁrst reported microsurgical vasectomy reversal
using vasovasostomy in humans was Silber’s description of
the technique in 1976 and 26 cases in humans in 1977
(529). Silber was fellowship trained in microsurgery under
the mentorship of the late Earl Owen, a world-renowned microsurgeon/plastic surgeon in Melbourne, Australia. Silber’s
project during his fellowship with Owen involved rat kidney
transplantation. Silber discussed potential theoretical applications of microsurgical techniques in clinical urology
when he returned to the University of California at San Francisco, published in Urology in 1975 and on a microsurgical
technique for vasovasostomy in Surgery, Gynecology & Obstetrics in 1976. Earl Owen, who claimed that he taught Silber
the technique, or gave Silber the idea for the technique, published his results in the Australia and New Zealand Journal of
Surgery in 1977 (530), the same year that Silber reported a signiﬁcant series in Fertility and Sterility. It is likely that they
came up with the idea jointly and both deserve credit for pioneering microsurgical vasovasostomy. The ﬁrst very large series of reversals was the Vasovasostomy Study Group of 1,469
reversals published in 1991 (531). Further advances in microsurgical vasovasostomy included development of a microspike clamp for securing the vas without the use of high
pressure during vasovasostomy, the use of double-armed sutures (532) and, ﬁnally, a technique to address the marked
discrepancy in vasal lumina often seen at the time of vasectomy reversal, the micro-dot technique (532). Currently, in
the hands of experienced microsurgeons, vasectomy reversal
results in return of sperm to the ejaculate in anywhere from
85% to 99% of men with pregnancy rates varying from
40% to 80%, depending on female age and time since vasectomy. Several studies have shown that, compared to going
directly to IVF/ICSI, when female age is not a factor, vasectomy reversal is signiﬁcantly more cost-effective than IVF/
ICSI.
The next major advance in microsurgery for obstructive
azoospermia came with the development of end-to-end speciﬁc tubule microsurgical vasoepididymostomy, ﬁrst reported
by Silber in 1978 (533). This technique resulted in a dramatic
increase in return of sperm to the ejaculate from <20% with
macroscopic techniques to over 50%. Further reﬁnements in

vasoepididymostomy include the development of the endto-side technique, ﬁrst described by Wagenknecht in 1980
(534). Further description of this technique followed by Fogedstam, Fall, and Nilsson in 1986 (535). The end-to-side procedure was popularized by Anthony Thomas. The next major
advance was the description of the intussusception technique
by Richard Berger, initially a triangulation end-to-side technique, published in 1998 (536). The difﬁculty of dealing with
six needles and making a well-deﬁned opening between the
triangulation created by the needles placed in the epididymal
tubule, led to the development of a transverse technique using
two needles with simultaneous placement of the two needles
described by Marmar in 2000 and, ﬁnally, the technique
currently accepted as the state of the art, the longitudinal
intussusception vasoepididymostomy, which currently yields
patency rates of up to 90% and pregnancy rates of over
40% (537).
In spite of these major advances in the microsurgical
treatment of obstructive azoospermia, more and more patients are being shunted straight to IVF/ICSI, even though
abundant evidence now suggests that microsurgical repair
is more cost-effective and, clearly, the most appropriate ﬁrst
technique with young female partner age and desire for multiple children. At the time of vasoepididymostomy, since the
failure rate is signiﬁcantly higher than vasovasostomy
when sperm are found in at least one vas, the authors strongly
recommend intraoperative cryopreservation of epididymal
and/or testicular sperm so that if the operation fails, another
procedure will not be required to perform IVF/ICSI. Finally,
since there is a signiﬁcant late failure rate after initial appearance of motile sperm, we recommend cryopreservation of
ejaculated semen as soon as motile sperm appear in the
ejaculate.

Key Points
Varicocele is the most commonly identiﬁed correctable
cause of male infertility.
Varicocele repair is associated with improved outcomes
of both intrauterine insemination and IVF/ICSI.
Current evidence indicates that bypassing varicocele
correction with IVF/ICSI is not in the best interests of
the infertile couple.
Finally, varicocelectomy can prevent and treat androgen
deﬁciency, which is a life-long health issue in men.
Microsurgical correction of obstructive azoospermia is
highly successful in the hands of experienced microsurgeons, and is the cost-effective procedure of choice
when the female partner is <35, and in couples who
desire more than one child.

Conclusion
Varicocele remains the most commonly identiﬁed correctable
cause of male infertility. The exact mechanisms of the varicocele effect on testicular function have yet to be fully elucidated. Our understanding of the molecular effects of this

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
287
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
vascular abnormality continue to evolve. This increased understanding should lead to a concurrent increased awareness
that bypassing varicocele treatment with IVF/ICSI may not be
in the best interest of the infertile couple or the male. Microsurgery for the treatment of varicocele and obstructive azoospermia has resulted in steady and dramatic improvements
over prior techniques. Of course, the success of these procedures is very much dependent on the surgeon’s prior training
and experience in microsurgery. These operations should
not be performed by urologists who are not well trained and
who do the procedures only infrequently. With the right
choice of couples, microsurgical repair of varicocele and
obstruction will continue to offer couples the opportunity to
conceive with, and often without, IVF/ICSI using the male
partner’s own sperm.

microTESE: AN EVOLVED,
EFFECTIVE PROCEDURE IN THE
TREATMENT OF SEVERE
MALE INFERTILITY
Peter N. Schlegel, M.D.
The assisted reproduction treatment of in vitro fertilization
was originally limited by abnormal sperm function (538).
The development of micromanipulation techniques to
enhance fertilization rates for men with abnormal sperm production and function revolutionized our options for treatment
of men with severe male factor infertility (539). Although
ejaculated sperm were ﬁrst used for intracytoplasmic sperm
injection (ICSI), men with obstructed and nonobstructive
azoospermia (NOA) were also observed to have sperm (540).
Sperm from men with obstructive azoospermia were used
for ICSI with effective results (541). These observations overturned many longstanding tenets of male reproductive physiology. It was previously assumed that sperm in the testis,
those that had not undergone epididymal maturation, were
incapable of fertilization of oocytes and subsequent development of normal pregnancies. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection changed the concept of what sperm could be used to
initiate pregnancy. With the evolution of assisted reproduction, a much broader focus on treatment of male factor infertility was possible.

Intracytoplasmic sperm injection with
surgically retrieved sperm
After demonstration of the effectiveness of ICSI using ejaculated sperm, men with obstructive azoospermia had sperm
retrieved for use with assisted reproduction. Men with
congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens and other unreconstructable cases of obstructive azoospermia were previously only offered donor sperm or adoption for substitutive
management of their infertility, so the ability to use testicular
or epididymal sperm for in vitro fertilization (IVF) with injection of limited numbers of sperm with ICSI was a dramatic
revolution in management of couples with azoospermia
(542, 543). Once ICSI with surgically retrieved sperm was

recognized as a viable treatment option for male infertility,
the potential for treatment of other severe forms of male
infertility was opened.

Sperm identiﬁcation in men with
nonobstructive azoospermia
The observation that sperm could be identiﬁed on testis biopsies of men with NOA was the other key observation that
allowed the potential to develop a treatment of NOA men
with a form of testis biopsy, commonly referred to as testicular sperm extraction (TESE) (540). Interestingly, although
we made the observation that men with NOA had sperm on
testis biopsy in 1993, the importance of the observation was
not translated into treatment of men with NOA at our center
until 1996. We initially were concerned that the morphologically abnormal and typically non-motile sperm seen during
TESE could not be effectively used, even with ICSI. The success of sperm retrieval and subsequent ICSI-derived pregnancies demonstrated the functional capability of sperm from
men with NOA (542, 543). Indeed, even the most dramatic
forms of NOA, such as Klinefelter syndrome, were able to be
effectively treated with TESE and ICSI.

Techniques for sperm retrieval in
nonobstructive azoospermia
Once the feasibility of obtaining testicular sperm from men
with NOA was demonstrated, along with the functionality
of those sperm using ICSI, reﬁnement of the techniques for
sperm retrieval were undertaken at a number of different centers. The use of ﬁne needle aspiration was shown to provide
limited numbers of sperm in men with nonobstructive azoospermia, and was recognized as an approach for sperm
retrieval for these men (544). Multiple-biopsy sperm retrieval
was also shown to be effective, but in some cases, up to 20 biopsies were required to identify sperm needed for ICSI (545).
The rapid introduction of multiple-biopsy TESE, rather predictably, resulted in the interruption of testicular blood supply
to the testis, since the vessels supplying the testicular parenchyma travel under the surface of the tunica albuginea, and
multiple random biopsies resulted in compromise of testicular
blood ﬂow. We ﬁrst reported devascularization of the testis as
a consequence of a multi-biopsy TESE procedure done at
another center in the mid-1990s for attempted treatment of
nonobstructive azoospermia (546). This observation led us
to consider that a multi-biopsy approach would create risk
of damage to the testis. Based on previous observations by
Jarow et al. of the human testicular blood supply as it courses
under the tunica albuginea, we began to use an operating microscope during the incision of the tunica albuginea for TESE.
The use of the operating microscope has been proposed by
Goldstein et al. (547) to enhance a wide variety of procedures
at Weill Cornell. At this point, I observed that seminiferous tubules within the testis, as seen through an operating microscope, had varied morphologies. The tubules that were
larger obviously contained more spermatogenic cells and
were therefore more likely to contain sperm. The use of an
operating microscope to identify the sites of sperm production
was easily identiﬁed as a more effective way to ﬁnd sperm

288
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
compared to multi-biopsy TESE, and provided sperm with less
tissue removed (548).

Anatomic principles of microTESE
The technique of microTESE (mTESE) was thereby born.
Informal polls at more recent scientiﬁc meetings demonstrate
that this procedure is used as part of the management of men
with non-obstructive azoospermia by a majority of experts in
male reproduction. microTESE refers to the procedure of
opening the testis widely, followed by dissection of testicular
tissue in parallel to the blood supply of the seminiferous tubules. Anatomical studies dating back to the 1600s have
demonstrated that the highly coiled seminiferous tubules
originate and terminate in the center of the testis (in the mediastinum or intratesticular rete region), traveling out to the periphery of the testicle. Each tubule is separated by a typically
very ﬁne ﬁlamentous septum with blood vessels running parallel to the tubules. This organization allows dissection deep
within the testicular parenchyma, so a surgeon can direct
observe nearly every region of the hundreds of seminiferous
tubules within the testis.
The distribution of testicular sperm production can be
most effectively ‘‘mapped’’ and sperm efﬁciently retrieved using a mTESE approach. It was initially (inaccurately) proposed
that sperm production was multifocal and diffuse throughout
the testicle (549). As microsurgical identiﬁcation of the sperm
production sites was effectively mapped with mTESE, we were
able to see that focal individual areas of sperm production are
not predictable and do not reliably occur in any speciﬁc
geographic location within the testis. Although sperm can
be identiﬁed on initial wide opening of the tunica albuginea
(65% of cases), deep dissection within the testicular parenchyma is needed to identify the focal sites of sperm production in the remaining cases, and examination of the
contralateral testicle yields sperm in the remaining cases,
even when no sperm was found after dissection of an entire
testis (550). Comparative studies of sperm retrieval approaches have shown that mTESE is about 1.5-fold more
likely to identify sperm than conventional TESE, and TESE
is 2-fold more effective than ﬁne-needle aspiration/mapping
or testicular sperm aspiration procedures at sperm retrieval
(551).

Variability of microTESE procedures with
different surgeons
Recent studies where repeat mTESE has found sperm after a
prior failed attempt at sperm retrieval after medical or other
intervention reﬂects that an ineffective initial sperm retrieval
procedure (incomplete microdissection) rather than the medical therapy prior to sperm retrieval is the reason why sperm
are found after these repeat sperm retrieval attempts. Of the
many surgeons who have come to observe the procedure of
mTESE at Weill Cornell, it is evident that the technique performed varies greatly in different surgeons’ hands, despite
use of the term mTESE to reﬂect the procedure. Unfortunately,
a limited incision, with limited or no dissection beyond the
initially exposed surface of testicular tissue is often done by

these surgeons. Limited exposure of tissue adversely affects
the efﬁcacy of a sperm retrieval procedure. It is unfortunate
that in some cases, the mTESE procedure is limited either
because of surgeon or institutional time-constraints, fear of
damage to the testis, or a lack of understanding of the importance of extensive dissection to identify sites of sperm production. When mTESE involves extensive dissection of
testicular tissue following the anatomy of the testis, limited
removal of tissue and careful management of intratesticular
structures, there are limited effects on testosterone production
and testis loss or severe damage to the testicle is not a measurable risk of mTESE in our experience (552).

Conﬁrmation of azoospermia: role of extended
sperm preparation
One of the critical factors for management of men with nonobstructive azoospermia is the re-evaluation of an ejaculated
semen specimen on the day of planned sperm retrieval. We
have routinely done sperm retrieval on the day before oocyte
retrieval in a programmed IVF cycle, in part because 5% to
10% of men with presumed azoospermia can have rare sperm
found on careful evaluation of a semen specimen, using an
extended sperm preparation technique; thereby avoiding an
unnecessary sperm retrieval operation. This is a very favorable result for a man who previously thought that surgery
was needed, and sperm from the ejaculate was available for
ICSI.
It is important to remember that azoospermia is deﬁned by
a lack of sperm identiﬁed in the neat semen specimen followed
by centrifugation of the semen specimen down to a smaller
volume that is then directly examined. The centrifuged semen
specimen may have a volume of 60-300 mL, and the specimen
examined after centrifugation may be only 5-10 mL in volume.
Obviously, rare sperm may be present in the residual portion of
the total centrifuged 60-300 mL volume pellet. Extended sperm
preparation involves examination of additional microdroplets of this total pellet (under oil to prevent evaporation)
so that the entire specimen is examined, not a limited part of
the sample. We have found this type of analysis to be particularly helpful for men with nonobstructive azoospermia associated with maturation arrest. Often these men have normal or
near-normal follicle-stimulating hormone and nearly normal
or normal volume testes. However, rare sperm can also be
found in ‘‘azoospermic’’ men with elevated serum folliclestimulating hormone levels of 20-60 IU/L.

Simultaneous sperm retrieval with
in vitro fertilization
As demonstrated in the last paragraph, there are reasons to
prefer simultaneous sperm retrieval with a programmed IVF
cycle. Sperm retrieval is obviously unnecessary in some
men who have previously been treated with intentional cryoTESE (freezing of sperm). In addition, many of the men who
have sperm found with mTESE may not have enough sperm
to freeze, or may not have the sperm survive freeze-thaw.
Finally, even for those men with nonobstructive azoospermia
who have sperm frozen and survive freeze-thaw, we have

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
289
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
observed lower pregnancy rates at our center than parallel
cases where sperm from men with NOA were used fresh
with IVF. Since sperm are the limited resource for couples
where the man has nonobstructive azoospermia, every effort
to maximize the use of those sperm is worth considering.

are identiﬁed in the operating room in 55% of cases.
For the cases with sperm retrieved, a clinical pregnancy
is detected with a fetal heart beat on ultrasound in 45%
of cases, with an average female age of 32 years at our
center.

Processing of microTESE samples
MicroTESE allows detection of the rare sites with sperm production. In most cases, sperm production is present throughout
the entire length of the enlarged tubule identiﬁed during
mTESE. If only focal dilation/enlargement of the tubule is
seen, then just the enlarged region is excised for sperm sampling. In some cases of focal enlargement of tubules, the tubule
may be artifactually enlarged because of Leydig cell nodules
near the tubule. The amount of tissue removed is typically
very limited in men with NOA undergoing mTESE. The delivery
of the maximum number of sperm from limited tissue to the
IVF laboratory enhances the ability of the laboratory personnel
to identify rare sperm in these tissues. An additional intervention that helps to identify these rare sperm is aggressive mechanical dispersion of these tissues prior to an attempt at
examination of the tissues. Prior to handing tissues off the
operating ﬁeld (or with processing on a back table), we will
cut the tubules with scissors and conﬁrm the disruption of tissue by passing the tissue suspension through a 24-gauge angiocatheter. The tissue is typically in 300-500 mL of sperm
wash ﬂuid. A small aliquot of this suspension is then examined
under a phase contrast microscope on a glass slide with cover
slip at 200 magniﬁcation for detection of sperm. Mechanical
processing with this approach enhances the number of sperm
seen by nearly 300-fold (545). Sperm are typically immotile
immediately after retrieval but often acquire at least twitching
motility by incubation in sperm wash medium, including incubation overnight in that medium with 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1piperazineethanesulfonic acid buffer removed and a Plasmanate (Bayer Corp.) protein source.

Use of testicular sperm for intracytoplasmic
sperm injection
Sperm retrieved from men with NOA are routinely abnormal in
appearance with 0% normal morphology. There are no speciﬁc
morphological ﬁndings that preclude the chance of pregnancy
of ICSI using NOA sperm, despite some IVF center’s concern
with use of these sperm. There are statistically lower chances
of pregnancy if sperm have not acquired motility by the time
of ICSI. Similarly, sperm with severe acrosomal abnormalities
are also less likely to affect fertilization and pregnancy. We
have seen that even men with sperm that have marked
morphologic abnormalities, including testicular sperm with
short tails (elongating spermatids) can initiate pregnancies.
Every effort to freeze residual sperm after ICSI is recommended,
since NOA men have severely limited sperm production.

Results of intracytoplasmic sperm injection in
nonobstructive azoospermia
Of men who underwent initial sperm retrieval for nonobstructive azoospermia using TESE at our center, sperm

Etiology of nonobstructive azoospermia:
results of microTESE
Men with complete deletions involving the AZFa, AZFb or
AZFbþc regions of the Y chromosome have no measurable
chance of sperm retrieval. We also do not attempt sperm
retrieval after a prior failed mTESE attempt at our center.
On the other hand, men with AZFc deletions alone often
have sperm in the ejaculate, and even those azoospermic
AZFc-deleted men with have a 70% sperm retrieval chance.
Men with NOA and a history of cryptorchidism have a good
chance of sperm retrieval (67%-74%). Similarly, men with
Klinefelter syndrome have a 68%-70% chance of sperm
retrieval, whereas men with a history of prior alkylating agent
chemotherapy and azoospermia have a 30% chance of
retrieval. Men with idiopathic NOA (no Y microdeletions, no
signiﬁcant history and no karyotypic anomalies) have a
48% sperm retrieval chance.

Learning curve for microTESE
MicroTESE appears to be a difﬁcult procedure to learn. During
early experience, trainees commonly provide too much pressure on the testicular tissue that may separate tubules from
their blood supply and devascularize regions of the testicle.
Similarly, microdissection and direct examination of the tissue may be hard to do when the surgeon is struggling to maintain the tissue in focus under an operating microscope. The
higher the magniﬁcation used under the operating microscope, the more effectively the surgeon is able to detect subtle
differences in seminiferous tubule size. We have seen that surgical times for mTESE may vary from 1-7 hours with a slow,
progressive decrease in operating time with hundreds of cases
of surgical experience. Similarly, sperm retrieval rates trend
upward with surgeon experience over time, when controlling
for the cause of NOA, an observation that we have most
clearly demonstrated for men with a predominant pattern of
Sertoli cell only.

Conclusions
In summary, development of the technique of mTESE has
optimized sperm retrieval for men with NOA, providing sperm
from a majority of men with this severe defect in spermatogenesis for ICSI. This procedure is a more effective technique
for sperm retrieval than prior, random approached at identifying sperm. This microsurgical technique is anatomic,
following the normal structure of the testis. Although mTESE
is a more involved and sometimes tedious technique, the
long-term safety of the procedure is well-demonstrated over
time for effective treatment of men with nonobstructive
azoospermia.

290
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

ENDOCRINE STIMULATION FOR
SPERMATOGENESIS IN THE
AZOOSPERMIC MALE
Alayman Hussein, M.Sc., M.D.
According to the 2010 World Health Organization manual of
semen analysis, men with a sperm count <15 million/mL, forward progressive motility <32%, and strict morphologically
normal sperm <4% have a lower chance to naturally impregnate their partners. Assisted reproductive technology (ART)
help infertile men who are beyond, or not responding to,
available medical or surgical treatment to father children.
To reach the expected probability of successful outcome, intrauterine insemination requires the availability of 5 to 10
million motile sperm in the ejaculate. In vitro fertilization is
introduced to help men with semen below this level of total
motile sperm count and requires the availability of 50 to
100 thousand motile normal sperm per ovum. In a key step
in the ﬁeld of ART, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)
is introduced and requires the availability of only one viable
sperm per ovum. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection opened the
door for cases of severe oligospermia and azoospermia to
have a chance of becoming a father if very few sperm were
available in their ejaculate or could be retrieved from their
testes.
In all cases of obstructive azoospermia and some cases of
nonobstructive azoospermia enough sperm could be retrieved
from the testes to be used for ICSI. Sperm retrieval rate in conventional testicular sperm extraction (TESE), in cases of nonobstructive azoospermia, ranges from 16.7% to 45%. Recent
studies to increase testicular sperm retrieval rate in nonobstructive azoospermia employ two different and often complementary strategies. The ﬁrst strategy is to improve the
technique of testicular sperm extraction to be able to retrieve
as much as possible from the available testicular sperm.
Microdissection TESE succeeded to increase sperm retrieval
rate to the range of 42.9% to 63% (553). The second strategy
is to increase the available number of sperm in the testis by
increasing testicular sperm production. Basically, if we stimulate spermatogenesis before TESE, more sperm will be produced and we will have a higher probability of ﬁnding
sperm in TESE. Understanding spermatogenesis and its hormonal regulations is the fundamental of this proposed line
of management.
The details of spermatogenesis and the action and requirements of the hormones which are responsible for its
regulation are not very clear. However, genetic and pharmacological studies have demonstrated many clear facts. The
primary role of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) is initiation of spermatogenesis and stimulation of Sertoli cell proliferation and determining the number of germ cells at the time
of puberty (554). Follicle-stimulating hormone is also essential for maintenance of normal spermatogenesis. Marked
reduction in all spermatogenic cells up to the stage of round
spermatids, is seen following the reduction of FSH after hypophysectomy or treatment with gonadotropin-releasing
hormone antagonist. FSH treatment increases all spermato-

genic cells prior to elongated spermatids. Lack of FSH results
in defective chromatin packaging and reduction in acrosomal
glycoprotein content of sperm. In addition, FSH may synergize with testosterone by stimulating the synthesis of the
androgen receptors. It was suggested that FSH has a role in
facilitating the transport and localization of testosterone
within Sertoli cells (555).
Testosterone is required for maintenance of spermatogenesis and is responsible for maturation of round spermatids
into mature sperm. It keeps the adhesion between germ cells
and Sertoli cells, as testosterone withdrawal leads to premature release of round spermatids. High intratesticular levels
of testosterone is essential for spermatogenesis. For normal
spermatogenesis, higher levels of testosterone are required
for androgen receptors in the testis compared to those in other
androgen dependent tissues.
In conclusion, both FSH and testosterone are required for
initiation and maintenance of normal spermatogenesis. So, it
is axiomatic that patients presented with delayed puberty and
diagnosed as hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism are azoospermic. Successful hormonal replacement with human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and human menopausal
gonadotropin (hMG) in these patients restore the normal level
of FSH and luteinizing hormone (LH) and stimulate Leydg
cells in the testis to produce testosterone and start spermatogenesis as long as there is no testicular insult (556). The use of
pulsatile injection of gonadotropin-releasing hormone is an
alternative protocol for restoring the normal level of FSH
and testosterone and successfully produces sperm in men
with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (557).
To start an endocrinal treatment to azoospermic men
without features of hypogonadism it is necessary to understand the hypothalamo-pituitary testicular axis that controls
the serum level of FSH and testosterone. Figure 27 demonstrates that FSH and testosterone are directly involved in
stimulation of spermatogenesis and the other hormones
namely; LH, prolactin, and estradiol contribute by their role
in regulations of the level of FSH and testosterone. Accordingly, it is recommended to estimate serum FSH and testosterone as an initial and basic step in evaluation of
azoospermic men. Additional hormone analysis, including
LH, estradiol, and prolactin, is particularly recommended in
cases with low or low normal serum testosterone based on
the likelihood of their abnormality and potential impact on
treatment choices.
The requirement of FSH and testosterone to normal
spermatogenesis and understanding the hypothalapmopituitary-gonadal axis are the rational for the ﬁrst use of
clomiphene citrate in nonobstructive azoospermia in a 2005
multicenter study (558). Clomiphene increases endogenous
gonadotropin-releasing hormone secretion from the hypothalamus and gonadotropin hormone secretion from the pituitary, thus increasing Leydig cell synthesis of testosterone and
intratesticular testosterone concentration which is a fundamental requirement for normal spermatogenesis. Clomiphene
is chosen in this study because it is known to be successful in
some cases of oligospermia to improve sperm production and
might be useful in nonobstructive azoospermia to produce
enough sperm for ICSI either by resulting in sperm identiﬁed

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
291
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

FIGURE 27
Hypothalamus

Inhibitory eﬀect

Gn RH

Inhibitory eﬀect

Pituitary

Prolacn

Inhibitory eﬀect

FSH

LH

Germ Cells
Spermatogenesis

Leydig
Cells

Testosterone

Sertoli
Cells

Inhibin
Estradiol

Secondary Sexual Characters
DHT

Hormonal regulation of spermatogenesis.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

in the ejaculate or potentially improving outcomes of TESE.
Clomiphene citrate was administered to 42 azoospermic patients excluding patients with Sertoli cell only syndrome
and testicular malignancy from the study. The dose of clomiphene was titrated according to the serum level of total testosterone which is measured every 2-3 weeks keeping it between
600 and 800 ng/dL. After clomiphene citrate therapy, 27
(64.3%) of the patients demonstrated sperm in their semen
with a mean sperm density 3.8 million/mL, mean motility
was 20.8%, and mean total motile count was 2.6 million.
One partner achieved spontaneous pregnancy (3.7%). Sufﬁcient sperm for ICSI was retrieved by testicular sperm extraction in all of the patients who remained azoospermic after
clomiphene citrate therapy.
These results were encouraging and opened the door for
further studies evaluating the value of clomiphene citrate
and other endocrinal treatment options for nonobstructive
azoospermia prior to testicular sperm extraction. When
clomiphene is applied to all nonobstructive azoospermic patients prior to TESE without any histopathological studies,
excluding patients with baseline FSH more than one and
half the upper limit of normal, it is noticed that the response
to clomiphene is not identical in all patients. Patients differ in
the dose and regimen required to achieve the target level of
testosterone and FSH. Some patients do not reach the target
level of serum testosterone and FSH even if the maximum
dose of clomiphene is used. Some patients respond to clomiphene treatment by an obvious increase in FSH without increase in testosterone. Few patients respond to clomiphene
by an unexpected decrease in testosterone which is also manifested by decrease in sexual desire.
Based on these ﬁndings, a new protocol for treatment of
nonobstructive azoospermia prior to TESE was developed
(559). The principle of this protocol is to reach the level of
FSH and testosterone in the testis to an adequate level for
stimulation of spermatogenesis with the use of Clomiphene

Citrate, HCG, HMG or a combination of them. Human chorionic gonadotropin, which is analogous to LH, stimulates the
Leydig cell secretion of testosterone. Human menopausal
gonadotropin (hMG) has both LH and FSH activity. A study
including 612 patients with nonobstructive azoospermia
evaluating this protocol demonstrated clearly that clomiphene citrate, hCG and hMG administration, when resulting
in an increased level of FSH to one and half the upper limit
of normal and total testosterone between 600 and 800 ng/
dL, may result in producing sperm in the ejaculate and
increased likelihood of successful micro-TESE. Hormonal
optimization using clomiphene, hCG and hMG according to
this protocol, might be useful in producing sperm in semen
and avoid testicular surgery in 11% of cases. If the patient remains azoospermic after treatment, the probability of ﬁnding
sperm in TESE is increased by 1.7-fold.
It is clear in this study that optimizing the levels of FSH
and total testosterone is the base of the success of treatment
and not the type of the used drug. It is necessary to optimize
testosterone level by stimulating its endogenous secretion
and avoid administration of exogenous androgens. The
administration of exogenous testosterone and other androgens have a negative feedback on hypothalamic pituitary
gonadal axis and inhibit the secretion of FSH and LH from
the pituitary gland and consequently decrease intratesticular
testosterone and inhibit spermatogenesis.
Many studies reported variable degrees of success of the
empirical use of different drugs in the treatment of nonobstructive azoospermia. Exogenous gonadotropin treatments
include the use of hCG, hMG, and recombinant FSH. The
reason for gonadotropin administration in idiopathic azoospermia is based on its observed efﬁcacy in the treatment of
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. However, their effectiveness for treating normogonadotropic azoospermia is less clear
and uncertain. It is believed that the administration of hCG
and hMG in men with normal level of FSH and LH is useless
with a disappointing outcome. But, Selman et al. reported a
32-year-old man with Y chromosome microdeletion who
received recombinant FSH and hCG and the few thousands
of sperm that were demonstrated in his ejaculate were enough
for a successful ICSI (560). Similarly, in the Efesoy et al. study,
sperm in the ejaculate of 2 of 11 azoospermic men with maturation arrest were reported after treatment with recombinant
FSH (561). On the other hand and in another study, Selman
et al. treated 49 men, who had no sperm in the pretreatment testis biopsy, with recombinant FSH and HCG
and reported that all men remained azoospermic at the end
of treatment, however, sperm were found in the biopsies of
22% men after treatment (562). Similarly, Shiraishi et al. reported that sperm were successfully obtained at the second
micro-TESE in 21% of men who had negative initial microTESE and received hCG and recombinant FSH, whereas no
sperm were retrieved from untreated men and noticed that
the success at the second micro-TESE was more likely if histology at the ﬁrst micro-TESE showed hypospermatogenesis
(563). Also, Ramasamy et al. reported improvement in the
outcomes of primary TESE following gonadotropin therapy
in men with nonobstructive azoospermia and Klinefelter's
syndrome (564).

292
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

FIGURE 28

Endocrinal stimulation of spermatogenesis based on the initial and periodic hormonal levels.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

Targeting the imbalance between the circulating levels of
testosterone and estradiol has been investigated as a potential
therapeutic tool in men with nonobstructing azoospermia.
Aromatase enzyme converts the circulating testosterone and
other androgens into estrogen within fat cells, liver and testes.
In markedly obese men, there may be an excessive endogenous conversion of testosterone into estrogen that results in
a reversible imbalance in the testosterone/estradiol ratio.
Estradiol suppresses pituitary secretion of FSH and LH and
consequently inhibits testosterone biosynthesis in the testes
and impairs sperm production. Aromatase inhibitors correct
the suppressive effect of estrogen on gonadotropins and
testosterone production and by restoring their normal levels
it is supposed that spermatogenesis is improved. Raman and
Schlegel used the aromatase inhibitors anastrazole and testolactone in 140 infertile men with low testosterone and a low
testosterone/estradiol ratio and found a signiﬁcant increase
in testosterone level, sperm count and motility in oligospermic men (565). Pavlovich et al. studied the use of testolactone
in men with nonobstructive azoospermia and in severe oligospermia and reported signiﬁcant improvements in cases of
oligospermia regarding total sperm counts and motility.
But, none of the azoospermic men showed any return of
sperm in the ejaculate (566). Many studies argue against the
beneﬁcial use of aromatase inhibitors in nonobstructive
azoospermia to show sperm in the ejaculate. However, a potential role in improving the quality or quantity of testicular
sperm is suggested, thus improving the outcomes of sperm
retrieval in testicular sperm extraction (564).
The success of endocrinal stimulation of spermatogenesis
depends mainly on the functional capacity of the testis which
is manifested by the serum levels of FSH and testosterone. So,

in addition to complete history and full examination, hormonal evaluation is mandatory before starting any endocrinal treatment of spermatogenesis. When obstructive
azoospermia is diagnosed, the choice of treatment will be genital duct reconstructive surgery and/or testicular sperm
extraction without any kind of prior medical treatment.
High levels of FSH and LH with low or normal testosterone
in azoospermic men indicate a primary testicular failure and
there is no role of medical treatment. The only option for these
cases is micro-TESE and ICSI.
In cases with low testosterone in azoospermic men with
normally developed sexual features, we need more hormonal
evaluation to reach the speciﬁc cause of the decreased testosterone level. Assessment of serum level of FSH, LH, prolactin,
estradiol, and thyroid hormones are required to reach the etiology and select the type of hormonal treatment. Figure 28
summarizes the available lines of endocrinal stimulation of
spermatogenesis based on the initial and periodic hormonal
levels.
It is preferred that the patient continue on endocrinal
stimulation for six months which is equivalent to two spermatogenic cycles and semen analysis is advised to be done
monthly starting at the third months. If the patient remains
azoospermic after 6 months of treatment with achievement
of the target levels of FSH and serum testosterone, it is recommended to schedule him for micro-TESE and the patient is
advised to continue treatment up to the day of micro-TESE.
The disadvantage of medical treatment prior to TESE is
the delay of ICSI for 6 to 9 months which is particularly
important in old aged partners. On the other hand, it is also
a waste of time if a patient, who is eligible for endocrinal
stimulation, had a negative micro-TESE without a prior

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
293
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
endocrinal therapy. The advisable choice in this case is to start
hormonal treatment and schedule the patient for a second
microTESE. The success of sperm retrieval decreases with
the repetition of TESE and the outcome of endocrinal stimulation for spermatogenesis is expected to be much lower in
patients with one or more previous testicular surgeries that
possibly cause testicular devascularization and ﬁbrosis minimizing the response of treatment (567).

THE GENETIC BASIS OF
MALE REPRODUCTIVE FAILURE:
EARLY DISCOVERIES AND
CLINICAL CONSEQUENCES
Robert D. Oates, M.D.
The nascent ﬁeld of male reproductive genetics has seen
tremendous progress in the last 30 years, paralleling the advances in treatment options and opportunities for the most
severely infertile men. No less important is the tremendous
advancement in the understanding of the inner workings of
the human genome. In this contribution, we will review the
three most relevant clinical conditions by brieﬂy discussing
the phenotype and genotype of each and why and how this
biological connection came to be known.

Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens
On the shoulders of the pioneers of male reproductive medicine and surgery, coupled with the revolutionary development of in vitro fertilization, new basic science
investigators and clinical practitioners came enthusiastically
and collaboratively into the ﬁeld of male infertility in the
mid- to late-1980s. The ﬁrst blend of genetics and novel clinical treatment strategies involved the disorder of congenital
bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD). In 1990, Silber
and colleagues ﬁrst described harvesting sperm from the
epididymal remnant of men with CBAVD, using the sperm
in conjunction with in-vitro fertilization with the achievement of pregnancy (568). Ultimately, Silber et al. realized
that successful pregnancy rates were markedly enhanced
when the individual-retrieved spermatozoa were directly
micro-injected into the oocyte (intracytoplasmic sperm injection [ICSI]) (569). To ﬁnish the clinical saga, shortly thereafter,
Oates and colleagues imagined that, since ICSI was such a
powerful tool to compensate for extremely deﬁcient sperm
numbers and motility, frozen-thawed epididymal sperm
could be used with equivalent efﬁcacy to freshly retrieved
epididymal sperm. They indeed published the ﬁrst paper detailing the intentional, planned approach of harvesting sperm
with immediate cryopreservation into several aliquots/vials
and then using a single vial as the sperm source in a later
ICSI cycle. Their novel strategy separated in time and space
the male and female procedures, greatly relieving the logistical pressures on the couple and the treating clinicians
(570). Parenthetically, this group also published the ﬁrst paper
on intentional cryopreservation of testis sperm for nonobstructive azoospermic (NOA) patients, a strategy for both

epididymal and testis sperm that is now routinely and
commonly employed (571).
As we were learning how to treat CBAVD more and more
effectively, the genetic underpinnings of the condition were
also being elucidated in an effort to prevent our ability to treat
CBAVD from outstripping our knowledge of its genetic basis.
The cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) gene was isolated, characterized, and
investigated for mutations in 1989, described beautifully in
a series of three papers in Science (572–574). Based upon
prior knowledge that males with clinical CF (pulmonary and
pancreatic dysfunction and disease) had the very unusual
coexistent ﬁnding of bilaterally absent vasa, Oates and
colleagues posited in 1990 or so that males with CBAVD
may also have mutations in their maternally and paternally
inherited CF genes such that CBAVD could be considered a
primarily genital form of CF. Indeed, this was true and
immediately expanded dramatically the clinical phenotype
on the more mildly affected end of the CF mutation disease
spectrum (575). They also realized that it was the
combination of mutations and their effect on ultimate
cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR;
the protein product of the CF genes) quantity and quality
that determined the clinical and phenotypic consequences
in an individual. Genotype and phenotype were linked. This
ﬁnding led to three very important corollaries. The ﬁrst was
for the patient himself. This not only explained why he had
bilateral vasal absence but also why he may have chronic
sinusitis or episodes of bronchitis, for example. It offered a
new understanding for him and his physicians about the
reasons for these associated conditions, potentially
changing his treatments and management strategies for
them with the new knowledge that those conditions were
consequences of CFTR dysfunction. The second was about
the couple and their offspring. Prior to undergoing sperm
aspiration and ICSI, both partners need CF mutation
analysis carried out to determine if the female partner is a
carrier (an asymptomatic simple heterozygote). If she is,
preimplantation genetic diagnosis should be considered to
avoid transfer of an embryo that is destined to be an
individual with life-shortening, life-altering clinical CF.
Finally, the male with CBAVD was often the ﬁrst in his family
to have a CF mutation detected and so family counselling and
screening became important to help others, especially his siblings who were often also of reproductive age, to learn of their
carrier status and to use that information proactively.
Through the 1990s, different investigators conﬁrmed this
insightful discovery and provided more and more correlation
between the genotype detected and the phenotype displayed.
While acknowledgment of the CFTR dysfunction/CBAVD
causal link was becoming rapidly known and accepted, Oates
et al., as well as others in the ﬁeld, appreciated that not all
men with CBAVD had evident CFTR mutations, especially
those with associated unilateral renal agenesis (576). Based
upon an understanding of the embryology of the mesonephric
duct and its role in both ureteral and reproductive duct development, it was easy to intuit a primary defect in bilateral
mesonephric duct morphogenesis prior to week 7 of gestation
that would result in harm to all 4 derivatives of the 2 mesonephric ducts. The most severe expression of this putative

294
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
genetic mishap would be bilateral renal agenesis coupled with
bilateral vasal agenesis. However, those so afﬂicted do not
survive much past birth. But if the phenotype expressed is
just a little bit less pronounced and one ureteral/renal unit develops, that male may present later on in life with infertility
secondary to CBAVD and be found to have unilateral renal
agenesis. Cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator mutation analysis will not be informative. The genetic
basis of CBAVD/unilateral renal agenesis has been elusive.

Y chromosomal microdeletions
As our creativity increased vis-a-vis what male infertility
conditions could be adequately treated with ICSI, we learned
that even sperm harvested from the testis tissue itself would
affect fertilization, that embryos would grow and mature,
and that babies would be born (577). Individual spermatozoa
could actually be retrieved from the seminiferous epithelium
of approximately 50% of cases of NOA and employed successfully with ICSI, even frozen-thawed as previously
mentioned. Were we being too zealous and not cautious
enough in the use of our new found abilities to create biological fatherhood; where was the concern for the offspring and
their health, both overall and reproductive? It was not enough
to just inspect newborns and hope that they would be ﬁne
throughout life; it was necessary to try and determine, if
possible, the genetic basis underlying these drastic conditions.
Heretofore, nature and evolution had rarely permitted transmission of these genetic defects but for many men, our technology had overcome these limitations without a
comprehensive understanding of the risks to the offspring.
During these clinically advancing years in the early 1990s
for men with NOA, research was being conducted in a parallel
basic science ﬁeld on the Y chromosome. What was the molecular geography of the Y chromosome, were there any genes
of consequence along its length, where was the putative testis
determining region located, and why was there spermatogenic failure when the long arm of the Y was cytogenetically
visualized to be abnormal, as noticed by Tiepolo and Zuffardi
(578). The Page laboratory at the Whitehead Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, under the directorship of Dr.
David Page was at the forefront of trying to answer these vexing questions with clinical material (blood) and clinical characterization of patient subjects being provided by Oates and
Silber (579, 580).
In the mid to late 1990s it became clear that there were
genes necessary for optimal sperm production sprinkled
about the length of the long arm of Y, that there were several
long palindromic sequences within which some of these genes
resided, and that on rare occasions microdeletions would
occur within these palindromic stretches (especially P5
though P1). Meshing the molecular ﬁndings of an individual
patient with his clinical parameters, a picture slowly evolved
of the relationship and bond between an absence of certain
segments on Yq and the consequent adverse effect on spermatogenesis. Other laboratories and investigators also began
to explore these causal associations and add to the growing
evidence. The most common of the missing pieces was termed
AZFc and is not uncommonly found in the severely oligosper-

mic or NOA male (581, 582). This early collaboration and
synthesis of molecular biology and clinical medicine ﬁnally
led to a commercialization of the Y chromosomal
microdeletion assay, a routine test in the work-up of severe
oligospermia or NOA, from laboratory to bedside in just a
few short years. The reasons this discovery was so important
were, and are still, quickly apparent. First, certain microdeletions discovered upon testing such as AZFb/c predicts that
sperm will not be found on testicular sperm extraction
(TESE), even microTESE described ﬁrst by Schlegel and colleagues (583). If an AZFb/c microdeletion is detected, there
is no reason to subject the patient to a surgical sperm retrieval
procedure as, unfortunately, sperm do not exist and will not
be detected, no matter how much invasive searching takes
place (584). Secondly, an AZFc microdeletion, on the other
hand, portends a much better prognosis for sperm retrieval;
it can either be found in the ejaculate in very low numbers
or in the testis tissue upon TESE in approximately 70% of
men so afﬂicted (585). It is almost always a de novo event.
Even though the sperm work well when used in conjunction
with ICSI, every single male offspring that may result will
inherit this Y chromosome and its AZFc microdeletion
(586). That male, that son, that adult will be destined for,
and burdened by severe, if not total, reproductive deﬁciency.
There is certainly no ethical guideline to offer couples in these
circumstances but with this knowledge at hand, they may
decide to transfer only female embryos to have reproductively
ﬁt daughters, as an example.
Finally, even more aberrantly deformed Y chromosomes,
e.g. isodicentric Y chromosomes, have been revealed and their
complex developmental history and the implications in terms
of spermatogenesis and offspring phenotype become understood (587).

Klinefelter syndrome
Klinefelter Syndrome (KS) provides yet another example of
the intersection of biological, genetic, and clinical insights
that led to amazing advancements for couples and their
many resultant children. Klinefelter, Reifenstein and Albright
originally described the interesting phenotypic constellation
of gynecomastia, hypogonadal levels of virilization, small
testes and azoospermia, later shown to result from a
47,XXY karyotype (588). It was thought that all KS boys
and men presented exactly that way, sterile with eunuchoid
body proportions. Their testes were atrophic, seminiferous tubules were sclerotic and hyalinized and their Leydig cells were
hyperplastic. ‘‘Unfortunately, we cannot help you as your
testes do not make sperm,’’ a common piece of devastating
news we conveyed to our desperate couples.
As for other known and unknown reasons for underlying
NOA, the questions became would the testes of KS men harbor
sperm and, if so, would that sperm actually work. The answer to
the ﬁrst part came from Tournaye et al. in 1996, followed
rapidly by the answer to the latter part from Palermo et al. in
1998 (589, 590). Sperm could indeed be found and could
generate viable, healthy live births and those babies were
46,XY or 46,XX. These two dramatic and seminal papers
initiated a resurgence in interest in KS. What a dramatic turn

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
295
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
of events for the 1:600 males born with KS; from absolute
sterility to possible biological fatherhood. Numerous
programs have since replicated that success and insights into
the basic biology of the limited spermatogenesis in the
47,XXY testis have shown us that the spermatozoa found are
almost all 23,X or 23,Y and arise from 46,XY spermatogonial
clones that can complete meiosis and spermiogenesis. What
a comforting thought for prospective parents that the
genotype and phenotype of their offspring will be effectively
the same as for couples in whom the male factor infertility
component is not caused by a 47,XXY karyotype.
We learned of the tremendously wide phenotypic spectrum of KS, ranging from complete failure of pubertal progression in the adolescent to fully virilized but infertile in
the adult. This difference is based simply on how much ability
the atrophic testes (and their Leydig cells) have to produce
testosterone. That is, virilization is a direct phenotypic manifestation of Leydig cell function /dysfunction. While the path
offered to the adult male and his partner presenting for infertility is clear (microTESE and ICSI), what of the adolescent
discovered to have KS? Damani et al. were ﬁrst to describe
the unknowns and the issues involved in these cases; would
there be sperm present, should we be performing microTESE
in this age group to preserve fertility, and what will the
long term outcomes be (591)? Great debate ensued and,
although not fully resolved, led to a new and innovative
line of research by Paduch et al., as well as numerous others,
into the associated consequences of having an extra X chromosome, especially the endocrinological ones (592). As we
pay attention and learn about these other issues of sex chromosomal aneuploidy, we realize, vis-a-vis Klinefelter Syndrome, it is not just about the sperm.

Conclusion
We must strive to continue to understand the conditions we
are more and more successfully treating; we always should
consider the offspring’s health and welfare as well and information we can provide to the couple is how we can best do
that. This pertains to spermatozoal defects such as globozoospermia, dysplasia of the ﬁbrous sheath, and primary ciliary
dyskinesia, to name but a few. The marriage of clinical medicine and basic science research, in terms of elucidating the
genetic basis of conditions such as these, needs to be strong
and stable. It has to grow and thrive. This will apply to not
just genetic but also epigenetic etiologies of male factor
dysfunction.

FERTILITY PRESERVATION
IN THE MALE
Robert E. Brannigan, M.D. and
Craig I. Niederberger, M.D.
Fertility preservation: the emergence of a ﬁeld
Over the course of a male’s lifetime, he has an approximately
50% chance of being diagnosed with cancer. This diagnosis

can be truly devastating to a patient, but with advancements
in oncologic therapies, dramatic improvements have been
realized in survival rates over the last 40 years. More specifically, for males between 0-44 year of age, the ﬁve-year cancer survival rate is an impressive 78.3% (593). The vast
majority of males diagnosed with cancer will thus survive
their cancer, and the medical literature clearly indicates that
most of these patients will want the opportunity to biologically father a child with their own sperm during their lifetime.
Cancer is a complex disease process, and the multipronged therapies commonly used to treat it are also often
elaborate and involved. Even before the initiation of oncologic treatments, cancer itself and the body’s immune
response to cancer can adversely impact reproductive potential. Tumors involving the hypothalamus and pituitary gland
can impair the secretion of gonadotropins, which are essential
for the initiation and maintenance of normal spermatogenesis. The testicles are the site of spermatogenesis, and primary
testicular tumors (i.e. seminomatous and nonseminomatous
germ cell tumors) and tumors metastatic to the testicles (i.e.
lymphoma) can have signiﬁcant adverse effects. These tumors
can replace normal testicular tissue, disrupt sperm production, obstruct the rete testes and/or efferent ductules, and
block the egress of sperm from the testicles. A number of
oncologic processes can involve the structures comprising
the excurrent ductal system, including the epididymis, vas
deferens, seminal vesicles, and the ejaculatory ducts within
the prostate gland. Similarly, processes affecting the sympathetic nervous system, particularly within the retroperitoneum and pelvis, can disrupt seminal emission and
ejaculation. Beyond these direct tumor effects, a patient’s immune response to cancer can negatively impact fertility. Cytokines have been implicated in disrupting the normal
function of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland, resulting
in a relative hypogonadotropic hypogonadism state in some
patients. Additionally, germ cell stem cells and their lineage
cells progressing through the stages of spermatogenesis can
be damaged by cytokines and other mediators of the immune
system, causing massive germ cell loss and decreased fertility
potential.
Beyond the effects of cancer itself, cancer therapies can
similarly have a profound and deleterious impact on fertility.
While a full review of the effects of speciﬁc chemotherapeutic
agents is beyond the scope of this manuscript, these medications are well characterized in terms of the potential threat
that they each pose to male reproductive potential. That being
said, the speciﬁc effect that a particular drug or regimen will
have on a given patient is difﬁcult to reliably predict, as
observed by Green et al. in their studies of survivors of pediatric cancer who had previous chemotherapy with alkylating
agents (594). Radiation therapy is a mainstay treatment modality for many cancers. Radiation delivered directly to or
even in the vicinity of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland
can impair gonadotropic secretion, and radiation to the spinal
cord, retroperitoneum, and pelvis can injure the sympathetic
nervous system and thus disrupt seminal emission and ejaculation. Finally, radiation to the testicle, either primary or in
the form of ‘‘scatter,’’ can have lasting negative effects on
germ cells. This is an important point, because while Leydig

296
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
cells do not usually exhibit functional decline or apoptosis
when <20 Gy of radiation are administered, the germ cell
line is much less resilient. Doses as low as 2 Gy commonly
result in permanent azoospermia. In addition to chemotherapy and radiation therapy, surgical interventions such
as craniotomy, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, orchiectomy, radical prostatectomy, and radical cystectomy can
result in anatomic and/or functional disruption of key components of the male reproductive system. The hypothalamus,
pituitary gland, sympathetic nervous system, testicle, epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicle, and prostate gland are all
susceptible to damage from certain operative procedures.
Therefore, when discussing operative therapy with patients,
a careful review of the potential for injury or possible need
to remove of part or all of these structures should be made
if the structures are possibly at risk.
For decades, cancer survivors often had to be content
with a fundamental tradeoff: fertility potential in exchange
for survival. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, several important studies were published that highlighted the breakdown in
communication surrounding this issue. On the provider side, a
publication by Pryor et al. revealed that high percentages of
oncologists reported discussing the fertility risks of cancer
therapies with their patients (595). A subsequent study by
Schover et al. revealed that only 60% of male patients age
14-40 years were informed of potential fertility issues
associated with their cancer therapy, and only 51% of men
desiring to have children in the future were informed of the
option of sperm cryopreservation (596). The sharp
disconnect between the physician reported data and the
patient reported data led to a groundbreaking 2004 report
by the President’s Cancer Panel. This document provided
transformative insights when it stated that communication
breakdown regarding fertility loss and fertility preservation
was a common event during oncologic counseling. The
panel called for the use of cultural- and literacy-sensitive
educational materials when counseling patients, and it also
recommended that information be reviewed with patients
both verbally and in writing. In 2006, the American Society
of Clinical Oncology published a landmark article with recommendations regarding fertility preservation in cancer patients (597). This true milestone paper provided a roadmap
for clinicians to follow as they diagnosed, counseled, and
treated patients with cancer. Over the ensuing years, a large
increase was seen nationally in awareness of fertility preservation and delivery of fertility preservation care. Many centers created formalized fertility preservation programs, and
key themes emerged in the literature that integrated care
and optimized interdisciplinary communication were important characteristics of effective programs (598). Furthermore,
the creation of a patient navigator position, to oversee the coordinated delivery of fertility preservation care in the midst of
oncologic testing and treatment, proved to enhance outcomes. Despite many successes, the ﬁeld of fertility preservation is still hampered by lingering issues. For example, at this
time there is no clinically proven fertility preservation treatment for prepubertal males. Their lack of spermatogenesis
prevents them from banking gametes prior to cancer therapy.
Several centers currently have experimental protocols in

place for cryopreservation of testicular tissue from these patients, with the hope that one day science will advance to
the point where germ cell stem cells from within this tissue
can be isolated and used to create mature, functional sperm.
(599). Another group lagging in the delivery of effective
fertility preservation care are adolescents. (600) While these
patients are every bit as susceptible to the deleterious effects
of cancer and cancer treatments as males >18 years old, an
abundance of literature has clearly shown that this group is
offered fertility preservation care at markedly lower rates
than men >18 years old. Reasons for this gap in delivery of
care include a lack of familiarity with reproductive medicine,
discomfort among pediatric oncology providers in discussing
reproductive issues with minors, and a simple lack of access to
fertility preservation care. Clearly, adolescent males comprise
a group of patients that we can and should be doing a better
job caring for, as adult survivors of adolescent cancer reﬂect
on missed opportunities for fertility preservation with both
regret and anger. For this adolescent group, strides can be
made in improving treatment through the education of pediatric health care professionals regarding fertility preservation
care and enhancement of access of pediatric health care centers around the world to fertility preservation providers.
Research initiatives that successfully tackle challenging
clinical problems are an important hallmark of ﬁelds that
are growing and advancing. Over the last 15 years, numerous
federal government (National Institutes for Health, National
Cancer Institute, etc.) and private nonproﬁt (American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Livestrong Foundation, etc.)
organizations have provided funding to help nurture this
emerging ﬁeld in multi-faceted ways. Project topics range
from deﬁning optimal approaches in physician-patient
communication to basic science studies aiming to bring
germ cell transplantation and in vitro spermatogenesis from
the bench to the bedside. These latter initiatives have to potential to be truly transformative not only for cancer survivors
left infertile after oncologic therapies, but also more broadly
for large numbers of men with infertility due to other causes.

Sperm cryopreservation:
the bedrock of fertility preservation
One of the greatest impacts of the advancing technologies in
in-vitro fertilization during the past 40 years has been in
making paternity possible in males with azoospermia. Forty
years ago, only men with azoospermia due to anatomic
obstruction amenable to microsurgical reconstruction could
potentially be treated and father children. Now, not only
can men with obstruction intractable to surgery be remedied
with testicular sperm extraction and intracytoplasmic sperm
injection, but those with azoospermia due to spermatogenic
dysfunction may be managed with the same strategy and
similar success.
Frozen ejaculated sperm had been successfully used with
intrauterine insemination and in-vitro fertilization for
pregnancy, so it was only natural to ask the question
whether testicular derived sperm could be utilized in a similar
manner when intracytoplasmic sperm injection, without its
requirement for a motile sperm, was demonstrated to yield

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
297
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
fertilization, pregnancy, and live birth. With cryopreserved
ejaculated sperm, the convenience of not needing to have
the male physically present to give a fresh sample was
obvious. However, with testicular sperm and its attendant
needs for procedures ranging from inserting a needle into
the testicle to opening the scrotum, incising the testis, and
later with microsurgery, the convenience of having cryopreserved testicular sperm in advance of the intracytoplasmic
sperm injection cycle was doubly manifest. Cryopreservation
of testicular sperm should it be possible and effective thus
conferred certain signiﬁcant advantages for the couple, the
in-vitro fertilization laboratory, and the physicians involved
in reproductive care. One would be that it could be scheduled
in advance for the male, and both partners in the couple need
not undergo invasive procedures on the same day allowing
such small but important possibilities as each being present
for the other's procedure and driving each other home.
Another advantage was that should one doctor perform the
in-vitro fertilization procedure and another perform the surgical sperm extraction procedure, the problematic logistics
of timing two busy physicians’ schedules was eliminated.
But without doubt, the most compelling gift given by cryopreservation of testicular sperm was knowing whether or
not sperm could be obtained and male gametes from the intended biological father were available for in vitro fertilization. This knowledge allowed the couple the psychological
ability to consider well in advance what they wanted in the
case that sperm was not available rather than having to decide
on the same day as in-vitro fertilization, when both were undergoing invasive procedures at the same time.
Consequently, cryopreservation of testicular sperm was
in many ways even more desirable than that of ejaculated
sperm, but could it be done, and if it could, would it yield
the same outcomes as that of fresh sperm in intracytoplasmic
sperm injection? That was a compelling question in the 1990s,
the decade after the introduction of this new, in many ways
surprising form of in-vitro fertilization. As early as 1995, investigators described the successful use of sperm obtained
from testis tissue in intracytoplasmic sperm injection, and
many reports would soon follow in the ensuing years (601).
Like many groups and labs involved in male reproductive
medicine, we became very interested in cryopreserving testicular sperm and developed and published laboratory techniques that we observed to be optimal (602). One of the
pressing questions during the advent of cryopreserving testicular sperm was whether sperm from a failing testis fared
worse than sperm from an obstructed one. From the beginning, we observed that should strict laboratory protocol be
followed, pre-freeze and post-freeze viability, and fertilization, implantation, and pregnancy rates were highly similar
in both groups (602). The moral of the story was, if a sperm
could be found in a testis and frozen, regardless of whether
the testis was obstructed or dysfunctional, that sperm would
fare the same in intracytoplasmic sperm injection.
One unsurprising observation we made was that testicular
sperm was mostly non-motile and only occasionally twitching.
In the years since and even today, that fact has confounded
embryology technicians who intuitively desire a motile sperm
to select prior to its injection into the ovum. Of course, the tech-

nician will render the sperm immotile as a necessary prerequisite to intracytoplasmic sperm injection, typically today by
means of mechanical disruption with micropipette immediately after its identiﬁcation as the sperm to use. Motility prior
to injection was seen as some sort of proof of sperm viability for
intracytoplasmic sperm injection, having precious few other
means of demonstrating that the best sperm was selected. In
an often overlooked but key study from 2005, investigators
set out to ask whether motility mattered in predicting intracytoplasmic sperm injection outcomes, and observed that in fact
it did not (603). What we're left with is the simple truth that at
the present time, we don't have the means to determine in a
non-destructive manner whether for a single sperm its proteome, metabolome, genome, and epigenome is up to the task
of fertilizing an egg that will implant and lead to pregnancy
and live birth. What we do know is that motility doesn't help
in sperm selection. In fact, when we were developing the
optimal laboratory techniques for cryopreserving testicular
sperm, we observed impaired outcomes in intracytoplasmic
sperm injection when agents such as pentoxifylline that are
known to induce increased sperm motility were added. It was
as if these agents served as toxicants for the delicate in-vitro
fertilization cell culture. Certainly, pentoxifylline and other
phosphodiesterase inhibitors and calcium ionophores could
demonstrably induce motility, but induced motility did not
help in selecting the best sperm for intracytoplasmic sperm injection, and in fact worsened outcomes. A sperm chemically
induced to wiggle might please the embryology technician,
but that sperm's real job would be impaired. This counter-intuitive result explained why certain embryology laboratories
observed worse results with cryopreserved testicular sperm
compared to that obtained surgically and then used immediately. Cryopreserved sperm was more likely to be bathed in
chemicals such as pentoxifylline that induced motility after
thaw but befouled embryo culture. For the same reason, this
also explained why certain laboratories observed better results
for sperm from men with azoospermia due to obstruction than
from spermatogenic dysfunction where the occasional sperm
didn't twitch as in obstruction and was more likely to be subjected to motility stimulants.
In the years following the initial description of cryopreserving testicular sperm, study after study observed similar
outcomes with frozen and thawed tissue compared to that obtained on the day of surgical sperm extraction (604). A recent
meta-analysis demonstrated no discernible difference between fresh and cryopreserved sperm derived from the testis
when used in intracytoplasmic sperm injection in fertilization
or pregnancy rates (604). The promise of a convenient method
to obtain sperm from the testis that did not require substantial
overhead in schedule for patients or physicians, and most
importantly allowed the couple to know if paternal gametes
were available prior to the in vitro fertilization cycle, was
realized.
Challenges in cryopreserving testicular sperm certainly
remain. While certain chemicals such as pentoxifylline may
be toxic to embryo culture, others awaiting identiﬁcation
may promote or improve sperm function after freezing. But
perhaps the greatest challenge is that cryopreserving sperm
is an inefﬁcient system with fewer sperm retrieved from the

298
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
storage system than the amount inserted. This effect becomes
highly problematic when very few sperm are extracted from
testis tissue, when sperm can be found in tissue but none
retrieved at the time of thawing for in-vitro fertilization.
While this is a problem for ejaculated sperm as well, the inva-

sive nature of surgery and that it is best performed only once
creates a compelling need for a solution. Numerous approaches are under investigation in improving storage systems for cryopreserving very small amounts of testicular
sperm.

THE BIG PICTURE
LEGAL AND ETHICAL ASPECTS OF
IN VITRO FERTILIZATION
Heather E. Ross, Esq. and
Guido Pennings, Ph.D.
Legal aspects of in vitro fertilization
The success of in vitro fertilization (IVF) in 1978 has made
it possible to create families in ways not previously imagined. The legal presumption that a child can only have
one mother and father no longer exists, raising a multitude
of novel legal issues. What is the legal deﬁnition of an embryo and who decides how it may be used or disposed? How
do you establish parentage to a child born via third-party
reproduction? Can a child have more than two parents?
Can frozen gametes/embryos be used post-mortem? Are
fees paid to donors and/or surrogates taxable? The list
goes on and on.
Until very recently, attorneys in this ﬁeld had little guidance from case law or legislation and few colleagues with
whom to collaborate. It was not until the late 1980s that the
American Bar Association formed the ﬁrst national reproductive law committee. The American Academy of Assisted
Reproductive Technology was formed twenty years later, in
2009, followed shortly thereafter by American Society for
Reproductive Medicine’s Legal Professional Group. Over the
last ten years the legal community has experienced exponential growth with more lawyers practicing in this area, and
more local and international reproductive law organizations
emerging around the world. Currently, in the U.S. alone, there
are four national legal conferences each year dedicated solely
to assisted reproductive technology, and numerous additional
state, local, and international meetings focused on assisted
reproduction and the law.
Despite the recent growth in the legal community, laws
addressing assisted reproduction have evolved slowly
through the years. As is often the case, medical technology
develops ﬁrst, and eventually the law follows (often in reaction to an unfavorable or unanticipated legal outcome). In
fact, if it is true that the ﬁrst attempts at intrauterine insemination occurred with Henry the IV in 1455, it was centuries
later before any case law began to develop (605).
The ﬁrst set of reproductive cases (from the early 20th
century) arose in the context of heirship, holding that children
born by donor insemination were illegitimate, and the
mothers of such children were accused of adultery, even
when the husband was infertile and the insemination pro-

ceeded with the husband’s consent (606). By the 1970s, public
sentiment began to change and many states passed laws
acknowledging that a husband and wife using donor sperm
were the legal parents of the child. Many of these state laws
were lifted in part or whole from the Uniform Parentage Act
(UPA) of 1973 (607), which included a section on artiﬁcial
insemination, but only applied to married heterosexual couples working with a physician for the donor insemination.
Although these state laws (several of which are still in existence) seemed progressive at the time, today they are viewed
by many as outdated, discriminatory and in violation of federal law. Single persons, same sex couples and unmarried heterosexual couples are excluded from legal protection. The
UPA was updated in 2000 and amended in 2002 (608) to
include a section on assisted reproductive technology which
recognized egg donation and removed the necessity that the
parties be married, but continued to apply only to heterosexual couples. It was not until 2017 that the UPA was revised to
apply equally to same sex couples (609). Notably, only a
handful of states have adopted the 2000 UPA (amended in
2002) and only the state of Washington has enacted the
2017 UPA.
Most American states have not addressed egg donation,
and although parentage laws typically consider the woman
who gives birth to a child as proof that she is the child’s
mother, in all but a handful of states an intended mother
has no legal guarantee that she will be considered the legal
mother of the child (610). Similarly, until very recently few
states had surrogacy statutes, and even states with favorable
law, or where surrogacy arrangements were occurring regularly and supported by local courts (absent speciﬁc legislation
or case law), it has been burdensome for same sex couples to
be deemed the legal parents to the resulting child. The 2017
update to the UPA may prompt more protective legislation
in this area, as should the recent Supreme Court decisions
of Obergefell (611), holding that laws barring marriage between two people of the same sex are unconstitutional, and
Pavan (612), holding that states have to treat married samesex couples and married opposite-sex couples the same with
respect to putting a spouse’s name on a birth certiﬁcate. However, lawyers must still proceed with caution. For example,
notwithstanding the recent Supreme Court decisions, the
administrative act of placing a parent’s name on a birth certiﬁcate does not create an irrebuttable presumption of
parentage (one state is not required to recognize another
state’s birth certiﬁcate). Because certain states have tried to
create legal obstacles for same sex parenting, same sex couples should still be advised to pursue a co-parent adoption

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
299
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
and receive a court order (which must be recognized by all
other states).
Another relevant issue in third party reproduction is
whether children conceived from donor gametes have the
legal right to know the identity of the gamete provider. While
most states are silent on this issue, at least eleven European
countries now require disclosure of the donor’s identity
upon the request of the child (613). Although the recently
approved 2017 UPA does not require disclosure, it does
require that the donor be asked whether he/she would like
his/her identity disclosed, and also requires the gamete bank
to make a good faith effort to disclose the donor’s nonidentifying medical history information to the child or intended parent(s) upon request. Whether states will start legislatively requiring donor identity disclosure, or leave it up to
the parties to make these decisions is yet to be known.
The growing practice of reproductive tourism has led to
other unanticipated legal issues. Many countries have laws
speciﬁcally forbidding surrogacy and other forms of third
party family building, especially if compensation is involved.
Unable to build families at home, intended parent(s) travel to
the U.S. or other surrogacy friendly countries to access third
party reproduction, resulting in complicated immigration
cases. Although most attorneys entered this ﬁeld intending
to practice family law, many are now tasked with also understanding immigration matters as children born in other countries must return home and gain citizenship. In a few recent
cases, children born via surrogacy were initially stateless, as
the home country (where the intended parents reside) did
not recognize surrogacy as a means of parenthood and would
not grant citizenship, and the intended parent(s) could not
obtain citizenship or extended visas in the country where
the child was born. For example, intended parents from Germany entered into an arrangement with a surrogate from India, resulting in the birth of their twins in 2008. Because
surrogacy arrangements are strictly forbidden in Germany,
the German government refused to recognize the intended
parents as the legal parents and would not issue a German
passport. Because the twins were born to a surrogate, India
did not recognize the children as Indian nationals and refused
to issue an Indian passport. These children were stateless for
almost 2 years, until after extensive litigation they were
granted Indian identity documents and the German government issued visas to allow them to travel to Germany (614).
In sum, the creation of IVF has led to a developing area of
law much broader and more complicated than most lawyers
practicing in this area could have imagined. As medical technology continues to advance the laws will continue to follow,
and the attorney’s role will continue to be to guide their clients, and create legal protections for intended parent(s), their
offspring, and the gamete providers/surrogates who make
third party reproduction possible.

Ethical aspects of in vitro fertilization
Over the years, the ethical issues in IVF have changed considerably. One of the most contentious aspects of IVF at the start
was the creation and destruction of human embryos (615).
Since IVF was practiced in countries with largely Christian

dominated cultures, the embryo was attributed the status of
a (potential) person and as a consequence had to be respected
and protected. However, these concerns have died down to
make place for the recognition that surplus embryos and embryo destruction were an inevitable part of IVF. This is
remarkable since the main reasons for creating more embryos
than necessary (meaning: more than could be replaced in the
fresh cycle) were pragmatic. In fact, it would have been
possible (and still is) to practice IVF without violating the
rule of respect for human life in the form of embryos. Some
countries, like Italy and Germany, regulate IVF in a way
that many fewer surplus embryos are created. This evolution
is all the more remarkable as it is linked to the major adverse
reaction to IVF: multiple pregnancy. After a period of quasiunlimited transfer, it was acknowledged that the ﬁxation on
pregnancy rates was having disastrous effects (616).
Although the single-embryo transfer movement has been
around for two decades, the change in practice has been
limited. In countries without a legally imposed limit on the
number of embryos for transfer, multiple pregnancy rates
remain high.
The general practice of IVF cannot be understood independently from the society in which it was and is practiced.
The original idea was to give a heterosexual married couple
the possibility to become pregnant. Gradually, the indications
for IVF were broadened: from blocked fallopian tubes over
low sperm quality to unexplained infertility. Simultaneously,
the categories of people eligible for treatment increased. This
evolution was triggered by the increasing acceptance of previously discriminated groups in society, such as lesbian couples. This led to an expansion of the deﬁnition of infertility.
While one originally needed a clear medical cause in order
to justify an intervention, one moved further and further
away from the medical need. Social infertility now constitutes
a large part of all applications: single women, lesbian and gay
couples, older women, etc. This evolution was inextricably
connected to another modiﬁcation of the original scheme:
the use of donor gametes. Although the primary goal of assisted reproduction remains the creation of a child with the intended parents’ own gametes, this goal cannot be reached
in all circumstances. In some cases, there may be either a complete absence of gametes or an absence of functional or suitable gametes. Still, practitioners of medically assisted
reproduction did and do everything possible to keep the use
of donor gametes to a minimum. The introduction of intracytoplasmic sperm injection is the main illustration of this
endeavor. Much research is directed at ﬁnding ways to overcome barriers that at present can only be solved by using
donor gametes: in vitro maturation of oocytes, stem cell
derived gametes, elective freezing of oocytes, mitochondrial
transfer to rejuvenate oocytes, and even reproductive cloning.
Each of these techniques requires extended manipulation of
the gametes and embryos and thus introduces possible health
risks for the child. Many ethical problems in the ﬁeld demand
the balancing of risks for mother and offspring against the
wish to have a genetically related child.
The practice of gamete donation is an ethical mine ﬁeld of
its own. It started with the donor insemination within a heterosexual couple with a male partner with poor sperm quality.

300
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
Around the 1980s, oocyte donation came along. At the
moment, about one in ﬁve IVF cycles are performed with third
party gametes (617). At the start, practitioners advised patients not to tell the child or anyone else in their social
network. In the last decades, openness has increased slightly
but not spectacularly. The majority of heterosexual couples
maintain non-disclosure of the use of donor gametes. The present impression of openness is largely due to the participation
of patient groups (single women and lesbian couples) for
whom secrecy is not an option. At the moment, the pendulum
has gone completely to the other side with legislators and
counselors pushing or forcing patients to be open about the
donor conception to their child, even though no evidence is
available that this beneﬁts the children (618).
The second change is related to donor anonymity. In the
last decade, some countries have abolished donor anonymity.
The pressure for this change came from a small group of donor
conceived people who argued that they needed to know the
identity of their donor to complete their identity. This claim
was and is rarely critically assessed or analyzed. In the meantime, the claim has been broadened: it now not only includes
the possibility to ﬁnd out the identity of the donor but also the
possibility to contact the donor, to have regular meetings with
the donor, to be informed about donor siblings and their identity. This evolution is completely based on a geneticization of
identity, relationships, and family. ‘‘I know who I am when I
know where my genes come from. We are family because we
are genetically related.’’ As such, this focus on genetics is diametrically opposed to the whole practice of gamete donation
where the emphasis is precisely on intentional, social and psychological parenthood.
Finally, the entire ﬁeld of gamete donation has been
commercialized. There is a marked difference here between
the U.S. and Europe: payment for gametes has been accepted
from the start in the U.S. Over the years, the exorbitant
amounts offered to certain categories of oocyte donors have
drawn attention from the media. Europe holds more strictly
to the prohibition on payment for body material in general
but the shortage of gametes (and especially oocytes) has led
to increasing amounts of money for ‘reimbursement’ (619).
Moreover, also other aspects of the practice show the
commercialization: the availability of catalogues of donors
on the internet, the growing industry organized in private
sperm and egg banks, the websites advertising eggs and
sperm, the outsourcing of recruitment to large sperm and
egg banks, and the increasing role of brokers. This evolution
goes hand in hand with the trend in medically assisted reproduction in general where commercialization is rife. After 40
years, access to treatment is still a serious ethical problem.
If infertility is an illness that should be included in the basic
health care package of every citizen, reimbursement through
either public or private health insurance would be appropriate. However, justice is not only a task for the government
but also for the practitioners. As long as practitioners make no
effort to lower costs, governments will be very reluctant to
intervene to increase access.
In sum, medically assisted reproduction is a never-ending
source of ethical challenges. People frequently hold very
strong views and intuitions on matters related to life, repro-

duction and family building. To change these views, one
needs not only time and rational debate but also a supporting
society into which these techniques can be integrated.

IN VITRO FERTILIZATION AND THE
PSYCHOLOGY OF REPRODUCTION:
OPPORTUNITY AND HOPE
Susan C. Klock, Ph.D.
The birth of Louise Brown marked a new era of opportunity
and hope for infertile couples as the possibility of a successful
pregnancy became a reality with in vitro fertilization (IVF).
The psychological shift that accompanied this medical
advance was signiﬁcant. Instead of grief and sadness, there
was the possibility of hope for couples to achieve their dream
of having a child. Instead of being blamed for their infertility
because it was assumed there was a psychogenic cause, infertile women could try IVF and in the course of their treatment a
physical cause could be discovered and/or their goal of getting pregnant could be realized. The change in paradigm
regarding the relationship between a woman’s psychic state
and her fertility changed with the invention of IVF.
In addition to the psychological paradigm shift after the discovery of IVF, the ancillary applications of IVF techniques to
oocyte donation, gestational surrogacy and fertility preservation, both medical and social, have affected the psychology of
infertility (620). By differentiating the three components of
motherhood (oocyte source, gestating woman, and rearing
mother) IVF technologies prompted an examination and reﬁnement of the deﬁnition of who is a mother (621). In separating the
roles associated with motherhood, IVF and its related technologies have introduced a host of changing family constellations
(620). The psychological implications of these changing roles
is an emerging area in the psychology of reproduction.
A third way in which the psychology of reproduction has
changed due to IVF is the impact of fertility preservation techniques, both medical and social, on the opportunity for parenthood. Fertility preservation has broadened the course of the
developmental and physical limits of the reproductive time
span. Cancer patients can preserve oocytes or embryos and
realistically hope to become a biological parent after gonadotoxic treatment. Unpartnered women can freeze oocytes to use
later in life when they feel the circumstances are right for them,
allowing them to pursue other life goals and minimize the biological pressure to reproduce. Transgendered individuals can
pursue biological parenting in ways that were unavailable a
generation ago. Embryos can be created and cryopreserved
for years, prompting psychological, social and ethical challenges to decisions related to embryo disposition. IVF technologies have expanded the boundaries of reproduction and, as
such, have expanded the scope of the psychology of reproduction. This review will explore these three issues primarily as
they have affected women. This is due to the fact that the preponderance of psychosocial theory and research on infertility
and IVF has focused on women, that women bear the preponderance of the treatment burden in IVF and that the changing
deﬁnition of motherhood is speciﬁc to women.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
301
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
Change in paradigm
Prior to IVF infertile men and particularly women, were subjected to numerous psychoanalytic theories and interventions
to ‘‘cure’’ their infertility. References from the 1950s, 1960s,
and 1970s are framed in psychodynamic terms that posit a
psychogenic cause of infertility and suggest that once the
woman’s ‘‘conﬂict’’ with femininity and motherhood were
solved, the woman would be able to become pregnant (622).
The medical knowledge created from developing IVF was a
milestone because it could provide a medical explanation for
what had previously been attributed to a psychological cause.
As IVF successfully treated the previously infertile, the utility
of a psychogenic theory of infertility became obsolete.
Blaming the infertile individual for their infertility due to psychological reasons no longer had a place in the psychology of
reproduction. This paradigm shift is reﬂected in the publications that emerged in the post-IVF era (623). Mental health
professionals noted that instead of psychological distress
causing infertility; infertility and its treatment caused psychological distress. This simple but important shift in thinking
advanced the ﬁeld of reproductive psychology into a new era.
A new focus of psychosocial research investigated the
psychological aspects of infertility and its treatment. Guided
by stress and coping theory, studies investigated the stress
levels of women undergoing infertility treatment, prevalence
of depression and anxiety, ways of coping and marital adjustment to name a few. It was found that infertility was as stressful as other major medical disorders. Numerous studies
indicated that rates of depression among women undergoing
IVF were as high as 40% and up to twice as high as the rates of
depression in the general population for both men and women
(624). Rates of clinically signiﬁcant anxiety in women undergoing IVF were also higher than the general population with
estimates of 15% of women. Stress levels vary across the
course of IVF treatment with women who subsequently did
not get pregnant reporting higher levels of stress during the
monitoring and waiting periods. Moreover, retrospective
recall of stress tends to be higher than the daily ratings of
stress during treatment. Also, for men, infertility related stress
and depression increases over time, while sexual functioning
decreases. In terms of coping, avoidance coping has been
consistently associated with poorer adjustment to infertility
and dispositional optimism is correlated with better adjustment (625). Last, qualitative and quantitative studies have
demonstrated that a subset of patients (25%–50%) have reported strengthened marital relationships during the course
of infertility and its treatment. In summary, the paradigm
shift since the development of IVF has focused on the psychological consequences of infertility, its treatment and its
impact on psychological well-being.

Deﬁnition of motherhood
The development of parenting via IVF related methods of egg
donation and gestational surrogacy have prompted consideration of the different components of motherhood—genetic,
gestational and relationship/rearing or social motherhood (620,
621). As adoption has expanded, the category of motherhood
to include mothering a child deﬁned solely by the relational

connection, egg donation, and gestational surrogacy have
allowed for further consideration of the genetic and gestational
facets of motherhood by separating the roles of the woman
providing the oocyte and the woman gestating the pregnancy.
Previously, the woman providing the egg or the woman
carrying the pregnancy was deﬁned as the mother of the child.
Since IVF and these related treatments, the deﬁnition of
motherhood has changed by making the woman with the
intention to parent the mother, subjugating the genetic and
gestational roles to ancillary transactional roles. These changes
have prompted new psychological challenges to all parties.
Clinically, intended mothers describe a multitude of
thoughts and feelings. They are thankful for being able to
get pregnant, they worry about how they will feel about their
infant, they wonder, ‘‘Will she/he look like me and Will I love
him/her?’’ There have been both qualitative and quantitative
studies of parenting after oocyte donation describing the
themes that women identiﬁed and worked through as they
became mothers via oocyte donation. Mothers via egg donation acknowledged a strong desire for motherhood coupled
with the realization of their infertility and the traumatic loss
that infertility represented. As they made the decision to use
oocyte donation to conceive, these women reported coming
to terms with using donated oocytes to become pregnant
and characterized the advantages of motherhood via oocyte
donation as being able to experience pregnancy, to feel
normal after the infertility diagnosis, and to nurture and
establish a bond with a child. Golombok et al. have conducted
several longitudinal studies addressing the adjustment of
mothers after oocyte donation. These authors have concluded
that the mother and child interactions up to age 14 years do
not differ signiﬁcantly from those of mothers with naturally
conceived children (626).
Oocyte donors’ psychological experiences have also been
studied. Studies of post-donation adjustment among oocyte
donors have demonstrated that donors consistently show an
altruistic motivation to help others become parents and
most donors wanted to know the results of their donation
but only a minority actually found out the result. In terms
of the donor’s role in helping create a pregnancy, Jadva
et al. (627) found that half of their sample of donors had concerns about having children they would never see or know. It
is noteworthy that there are no long-term follow-up studies of
donors to date that explore their subsequent family building
plan, adjustment or contact with their adult offspring and
this is an area in need of further study.
For gestational carriers, a review of the available literature
found that there were few difﬁculties during the gestation process (628). Post-delivery relationships between the surrogate
and the intended mother was generally good with clear understanding of the motherhood boundaries. In summary, the
changing deﬁnition of motherhood prompted by IVF and its
related procedures has led to further reﬁnement of the primacy
of the social/relationship aspect in deﬁning motherhood.

Expanding the possibilities of parenthood
Medical and social fertility preservation, with cryopreservation of oocytes or embryos, has been made possible by the

302
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
development of IVF techniques and as such has contributed
to the ability of women to preserve their reproductive potential in the face of illness or personal circumstance. Medical fertility preservation has allowed women who have
cancer or other life threatening illnesses to bank their oocytes or embryos, undergo potential gonadotoxic treatment,
and remain able to have a child using their own gametes
(629). As the number of cancer survivors grows due to advances in detection and treatment, the issues of fertility
among cancer survivors has received increased attention.
Many female cancer patients are interested in the possibility
of having children and that the possible loss of fertility due
to cancer treatment is a serious concern, in fact the possibility of having a child can be an important motivator for
recovery. And while not all women who are counseled
about fertility preservation decide to undergo it, there is evidence that women are less likely to regret not undergoing
fertility preservation if they have been counseled about it
by their oncologist and a fertility specialist (630). For those
women who undergo fertility preservation, initial studies
suggest that 13% to 23% return to use their cryopreserved
tissue and attempt pregnancy (631). The expansion of medical fertility preservation has led to improved quality of life
and renewed hope of having a child where it was previously
unavailable.
Fertility preservation for nonmedical reasons is also
growing as employers are offering oocyte freezing cycles as
a beneﬁt to their female employees or women choose to
self-pay to undergo oocyte cryopreservation. The expanded
use of oocyte cryopreservation allows women to delay childbearing due to career, relationship or other life circumstances
(632). Oocyte cryopreservation can represent reproductive insurance for women who delay childbearing. Although it has
been argued that oocyte cryopreservation’s success has been
overstated and represents a false sense of reproductive security, it is nevertheless an increasingly common treatment
among those women who can afford it. Psychologically, it
presents another avenue of choice and hope for women
regarding control over their reproductive lives.
Development of IVF technology has also provided an
avenue for gay, lesbian and transgender individuals to have
options for family building. Gay male couples using donor
oocytes and a gestational carrier are a growing segment of
the third party reproduction ﬁeld (633). Lesbian couples can
share reproductive roles with one partner providing the egg,
the other gestating the pregnancy for a new constellation of
pregnancy creation. Transgender individuals are also utilizing
fertility preservation and assisted reproductive technologies
to maintain their options for having genetically related children after their transition. All of these options are innovations
that provide opportunity and hope to individuals previously
unable to create the type of family that they envisioned for
themselves.
As a consequence of the advances since the development
of IVF, the role of the mental health professional in reproductive medicine has also expanded. Mental health professionals
work with the treatment team to educate and provide support
for couples undergoing IVF and other assisted reproductive
technologies before, during and after treatment.

In summary, since the creation of IVF and the techniques
associated with it, the psychology of reproduction has
changed and expanded. What was once considered impossible 40 years ago is a daily occurrence now because of IVF.
This has required the concomitant expansion of psychological
theories, research and evidence based interventions in reproductive psychology. The interaction of technology, medicine
and psychology continues to expand and redeﬁne the role
of parenthood and has made parenting possible for those previously unable to attain it. IVF and its associated techniques
have created opportunity and hope for the possibility of
parenthood in new and expanded ways.

EUROPEAN SOCIETY OF
HUMAN REPRODUCTION AND
EMBRYOLOGY AND THE ADVANCE
OF ASSISTED REPRODUCTION
Simon Brown M.A. and
Andre Van Steirteghem, M.D., Ph.D.
Despite its worldwide acclaim, in vitro fertilization (IVF) made
only slow progress in the ﬁrst years after the birth of Louise
Brown. Moral objections seemed as great after her birth as
before, and, according to Robert Edwards, such opposition
would largely explain the hiatus between Louise's delivery
in 1978 (at Patrick Steptoe's state hospital in the north of England) and the opening of their private clinic at Bourn Hall
near Cambridge in 1981. "Human conception was considered
sacred," Edwards would later say, "something that should not
be tampered with"(634).
Progress was also hindered by the sheer scientiﬁc difﬁculty of IVF. Edwards himself had ﬁrst described the technique in 1969 (635) and throughout the succeeding decade
continued to report experiments in sperm capacitation and
oocyte maturation from his Cambridge laboratory. This challenging work was also undertaken without speciﬁc funding as
Britain's Medical Research Council turned down Edwards's
ﬁrst grant application in 1971 (636).
The world's third IVF baby, Candice Reed, was born in
Australia in 1980, where progress in IVF had been openly
documented and relatively encouraged. Her birth followed a
report from the Melbourne group in 1973 of two biochemical
IVF pregnancies which had been lost after <1 week (637).
Thus, by the start of the 1980s, there were two groups leading
the way in IVF, Edwards and Steptoe at Bourn Hall and Carl
Wood and Alan Trounson in Melbourne, each with live births
and a long track record in the biology of both human and animal reproduction. By now there were also several other
groups in Europe and the U.S., invariably led by gynecologists
and biologists determined to start their own programs.
In the U.S., any success had been frustrated ﬁrst, by
ethical objections to assisted conception, and then by the false
scent of IVF in a natural cycle, set by the precedent of Louise
Brown. Thus, Howard and Georgeanna Jones at their newly
established clinic in Norfolk, Virginia, had begun in 1980,
as Edwards advised, with the natural cycle but, after 41

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
303
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

TABLE 12

FIGURE 29

Chairmen of European Society of Human Reproduction and
Embryology, 1985-2018.
Chairman
Robert Edwards
Jean Cohen
Pier Giorgio Crosignani
Andr
e Van Steirteghem
Klaus Diedrich
Jos
e Egozcue
Basil Tarlatzis
Lynn Fraser
Hans Evers
Arne Sunde
Paul Devroey
Joep Geraedts
Luca Gianaroli
Anna Veiga
Juha Tapanainen
Kersti Lundin (SE)
Roy Farquharson

Country

Term

Great Britain
France
Italy
Belgium
Germany
Spain
Greece
Great Britain
Netherlands
Norway
Belgium
Netherlands
Italy
Spain
Finland
Sweden
Great Britain

1985-1987
1987-1989
1989-1991
1991-1993
1993-1995
1995-1997
1997-1999
1999-2001
2001-2003
2003-2005
2005-2007
2007-2009
2009-2011
2011-2013
2013-2015
2015-2017
2017-2019

Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

laparoscopic oocyte retrievals, had cleavage in just 13 patients and no pregnancies. Only at the end of 1980 did they
return to the stimulated cycle and a pregnancy in their 13th
attempt (638).
In this same report, Jones recalls how in 1981 he and
Georgeanna attended a workshop hosted by Edwards and
Steptoe at Bourn Hall at which ‘‘a small IVF maﬁa-type
group’’ met to exchange experience. Among the guests were
most of the few then making real advances in IVF: from Scandinavia (Hamberger, Wikland), Australia (Johnston, Trounson, Lopata), and France (Testart, Frydman, Plachot, Cohen).
And it was in the friendship and helping hand offered by Edwards to the French gynecologist Jean Cohen where the origins of ESHRE lay.
By then, IVF in France had devolved into two publicly
funded programs, the one led by Rene Frydman and the biologist Jacques Testart, and the other by Cohen. The former
delivered its ﬁrst IVF baby, Amandine, in February 1982,
and the latter a few months later. However, despite these successes, both groups were perplexed by high rates of implantation failure and ectopic pregnancy. So, in early 1984, Edwards
phoned Cohen with an offer to come to Paris and help his biologists Plachot and Mandelbaum.
During his stay, Cohen would later write, ‘‘.he also came
occasionally to dinner at my home and there we would often
discuss the prospects for reproductive medicine in Europe.’’ So
it was here that they raised the need for a European society
similar to the American Fertility Society, with its own agenda,
annual meeting and, most importantly, its own journal.
Reproductive medicine and science had so far been dominated
by the American journals but now, Edwards would say,
‘‘.when so many of the advances in IVF were made in Europe, it occurred to me that we needed a European journal
to serve as a forum for this work.’’
So it was, that on a May morning in 1984, Edwards and
Cohen were found sticking posters to the walls of the Finlandia Hall in Helsinki, where the 3rd World Congress of IVF was

From Edwards’s typewritten minutes of the ﬁrst formal meeting of the
temporary committee in London. This was the ﬁrst time that the
Society's name, European Society of Human Reproduction and
Embryology, was recorded.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

in progress. The posters announced plans for a European society in reproduction and an exploratory meeting the next
day. Around twenty attendees turned up, some just curious,
others more committed, to hear four items on the agenda:
the society's name, its aims, its constitution, and the election
of ofﬁcers. Edwards not surprisingly was voted chairman, but
all other decisions were deferred to a follow-up meeting in
London in September. And it was here at this ﬁrst meeting
of the temporary committee, held at the Westmoreland Hotel
that the society was formally founded and the name ESHRE
(European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology)
was ﬁrst recorded.
There was much debate over the name, but implicit in its
ﬁnal format were both clinical medicine (human reproduction) and reproductive science (embryology), a unanimous
recognition of the two integrated disciplines in human
fertility. Today, that tradition initially laid down by Edwards
and his committee colleagues persists in the disciplines of
ESHRE chairmen alternating from one two-year term to the
next between basic science and clinical medicine.
Today, one cannot over-exaggerate the energy Edwards
put into ESHRE. His papers in ESHRE's archives in Belgium
are testimony to boundless energy and gentle persuasion,
evident in a deluge of correspondence which one day in
1984 ran to 37 typed letters on ESHRE business. Thus, by
the time of that September meeting in London, Edwards
himself had drafted by-laws which, with amendments at
the time, are largely the constitutional arrangements of
ESHRE today. The minutes of that meeting note that those
present in London included Cohen, Crosignani (Italy),
Diedrich (Germany), Sunde (Norway), and Van Steirteghem
(Belgium), all of whom in time would follow the lead of
Edwards and become chairmen of ESHRE (Table 12,
Fig. 29). Edwards himself wrote up the minutes and noted,
‘‘It was felt that the scope should be restricted in general to
the study of gametogenesis, conception, the ﬁrst trimester
of pregnancy, but with the inclusion of associated topics
of relevance to the main subjects of interest, e.g. the birth
of children conceived in vitro, ethics, the use of DNA
libraries and other preparations.’’
There is much more besides the name, constitution,and
scientiﬁc scope which endures from those earliest days. It
was at this time that proposals for both an Annual Meeting

304
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
and a journal were made, but there was one other initiative,
raised at the temporary committee's ﬁfth meeting in Brussels,which would have real lasting consequences. This was
the formation of an ethical committee, ESHRE's ﬁrst subcommittee, under the chairmanship of Jean Cohen. Of course, it's
no surprise that Edwards looked to this new society to take a
judicious position on what he knew from experience would be
the controversies likely to dog the scientiﬁc progress of IVF.
Indeed, in this same year of 1984, a UK government report under the leadership of Edwards's Cambridge colleague Mary
Warnock had formally looked into the social and ethical implications of IVF, and its ﬁndings, reﬂecting the pluralism
that IVF implied, would eventually form the basis of the
UK's Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act. Thereafter,
IVF would be subject to legal statute in the UK (from 1990),
with licensed IVF centers led by a Code of Practice,and with
it the greater acceptance of IVF among the public, all of which
Edwards had supported from the beginning.
The position statements produced by ESHRE on ethics
and law continue to this day, with subjects under discussion
increasing in complexity with advancing technology. The
ﬁrst reports examined topics of basic debate, the moral status
of the embryo, cryopreservation, and gamete donation, but in
later years were added assisted reproductive technology (ART)
in single and lesbian women, sex selection for non-medical
reasons, and elective oocyte freezing. Even from the outset,
many of ESHRE's original members cited consensus on the
ethics of IVF as their principal reason for joining. Indeed,
Paul Devroey, a later chairman of ESHRE, named ESHRE's activities in the production of guidelines and position papers as
landmarks in ESHRE's history, and a cornerstone of everything which ESHRE went on to build. The ethics of IVF were
included as a paper in the ﬁrst issue of the Society's journal
Human Reproduction and in the program of its ﬁrst Annual
Meeting in 1985. Even today, many of the clinical subjects
pursued in the Society's hugely successful training workshops
do so from an ethical and psychological angle.
If ethical consensus on the implications of assisted reproduction has been a running theme through ESHRE's history,
its real universal impact lies with the journals and the Annual
Meeting. A journal for Europeans was, after all, the main
ambition of Edwards and Cohen in their plans for a European
society. It was thus on the very ﬁrst agenda of the temporary
committee and unanimously agreed by the third that ESHRE
should run its own journal, with Edwards proposed as editor.
Despite his protest that he was overcommitted, Edwards
agreed, but only on the understanding that an editorial committee might be formed to help him along. It was, of course, a
momentous decision and one which would absorb Edwards
for the next 15 years of his life, and immediately stamp
ESHRE as a society committed to the science of reproduction.
It would also, in greater measure than anyone could imagine,
fulﬁll those ﬁrst pioneer ambitions of founding a journal in
which European scientists and clinicians would ﬁnd a
welcome home for their work and where the eyes of the editor
would look warmly and diligently on any paper submitted.
Planning the ﬁrst issue of Human Reproduction proved a
tour de force for Edwards, with a pilot issue slated for distribution at the ﬁrst Annual Meeting in 1985. Edwards went into

overdrive, setting a deadline for the ﬁrst issue of January
1986, and seven further issues that year. Over the next several
years Edwards never lost any opportunity to convert meetings
into manuscripts or to canvass his contacts for papers for the
journal, often stressing urgency and a need to increase the
submission rate. ‘‘We need four or ﬁve papers a week as a
minimum to provide a good base,’’ he wrote in January 1986.
Edwards edited Human Reproduction until 2000, when a
heated dispute over publication (self or commercial) and a
strained relationship between editor and publisher ﬁnally
proved the end of Edwards's glorious partnership with ESHRE.
It was a turbulent time for the Society. Edwards would eventually go his own way, setting up Reproductive Biomedicine
Online as a self-published journal, while ESHRE took a deep
breath and extended its commercial contract with the Oxford
University Press. Since then, the journal has had a succession
of editors-in-chief, led initially by the Glasgow gynecologist
David Barlow (2001-2006) and followed by Andre Van Steirteghem (2007-2012) and Hans Evers (2013-2018).
As submissions to Human Reproduction increased during
the 1990s and pressure on page space intensiﬁed, Edwards
had taken a somewhat unilateral decision in proposing two
additional titles to the ESHRE stable, Human Reproduction
Update (launched in 1996) and Molecular Human Reproduction. By then, in the nine years since Human Reproduction's
launch in 1986, total subscriptions had risen dramatically
(from 351 in 1986 to more than 2,000 in 1994), along with
annual page totals and revenue (from £30,000 to almost a
half million by the mid-1990s). In addition, its impact factor
had slowly risen year after year (and before the 1990s were
over Human Reproduction would reach number 1 in obstetrics
and gynecology), with the quality of papers published
increasing all the time (as reﬂected in an increase in rejection
rate from 25% to 40%) (Table 13).
Both Update and MHR were proposed to siphon off review and basic science manuscripts from the main journal,
and both inevitably were edited by Edwards, a huge commitment with copy editing and page layout then performed at
Bourn Hall. In time, Human Reproduction Update, under the
editorships of Bart Fauser (2001-2006) and John Collins
(2007-2012) would achieve unprecedented impact factors in
the categories of obstetrics and gynecology and reproductive
biology, in 2014 breaking the elusive double-digit barrier under the editorship of Felice Petraglia.
Not least among the landmark papers published by Human Reproduction in the 1990s were those from the Brussels
group of Devroey and Van Steirteghem, describing intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) and results from their early
experimental work. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection was
without doubt a European initiative, and Human Reproduction's growth in the early 1990s rose in parallel to the emergence of ICSI in Europe.
Brussels reported its ﬁrst live births with ICSI in 1992 in
the Lancet, but thereafter all reports were published in Human
Reproduction. It took only a very short time for ICSI to prove a
true revolution in reproductive medicine, as monumental as
that of IVF itself, with most types of infertility, both male
and female, now amenable to treatment. There was a clamor
from centers around the world to know more, and both the

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
305
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

TABLE 13
Impact factors for Human Reproduction and Human Reproduction
Update.
Year

Hum Reprod

Hum Reprod Update

1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

2.421
3.650
3.003
2.997
2.987
3.253
3.125
3.365
3.669
3.769
3.543
3.773
3.859
4.357
4.475
4.670
4.585
4.569
4.621
5.020

2.642
3.651
2.297
2.887
2.969
3.710
3.731
4.194
5.449
6.793
7.257
7.590
7.042
8.795
9.234
8.847
8.657
10.165
11.194
11.748

Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

Vrije Universiteit Brussel hospital in Brussels, and ESHRE itself were instrumental in arranging hands-on and live video
training workshops. ESHRE began the ﬁrst of its registry audits with ICSI, to be followed a few years later with the
ongoing European IVF Monitoring registry and the Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis Consortium data collections.
Data collection and analysis would in time become hugely
important components of ESHRE's ongoing activities.
Despite widespread interest, Brussels was never complacent about ICSI. With ICSI a much more invasive technique
than routine IVF and drawing on apparently impaired sperm,
questions about its safety were and are still asked (and studied) today. The evaluation of pregnancies and children was a
condition of ICSI's approval by the Brussels ethical committee, and over the past 25 years, follow-up studies have found
a slight increase in fetal chromosomal abnormalities after
ICSI, and a congenital malformation rate slightly higher
than after natural conception, but otherwise no outcome differences. These results are reﬂected in the national registry
studies of the Nordic countries.
Van Steirteghem, who in 1991 had become the fourth
Chairman of ESHRE, reported Brussels' ﬁrst ICSI results to a
full house at ESHRE's ninth Annual Meeting in Thessaloniki,
Greece. More than 1,500 members attended, and this
congress, like the journal, was on a steady upward curve of
popularity and authority. Just 650 had attended the ﬁrst
Annual Meeting in Bonn in 1985, while in recent years
more than 10,000 regularly attend. The meeting is billed as
the world's leading event in reproductive science and medicine, and a global presence is indeed an ambition of the modern ESHRE. The Society's reach today extends via guidelines,
data collection and reports, certiﬁcation programs, position
papers, training, and of course the authority of its journals,
to present ESHRE as a point of reference for all working in
reproduction.

It's also clear from its history that ESHRE has never been
afraid to grasp a nettle, however politically or scientiﬁcally
uncomfortable that may be. ESHRE prominently opposed
introduction of the infamous Law 40 in Italy in 2004 (banning
embryo freezing and embryo selection) and more recently
supported open ART legislation in Poland. ESHRE has also
been consistent, even if controversially so, in its position on
new introductions and adjuvant treatments in ART, repeatedly calling for a strong evidence base before everyday application. This has most prominently been seen in an approach
to aneuploidy testing in embryos, where ESHRE has repeatedly doubted the strength of evidence for improved delivery
rates. The ESHRE Study Into the Evaluation of Oocyte
Euploidy by Microarray Analysis study, a randomized trial
designed and supported by ESHRE, found no difference in
outcome between aneuploidy tested oocytes (by polar body
analysis) and controls. Interestingly, at a meeting marking
the 20th anniversary of the ESHRE Preimplantation Genetic
Diagnosis Consortium held in late 2017, the only commonly
agreed claims for aneuploidy testing were in a reduced rate
of miscarriage and a reduced time to pregnancy.
The challenges facing ESHRE today according to its most
recent chairmen are reﬂected in the diversity of ART and its
social, political and personal implications, for which ESHRE
recognizes a public responsibility. In its earliest years, Edwards and Cohen proposed ESHRE to the Council of Europe
as the legitimate representative of reproductive medicine in
Europe. Today, such representation continues with renewed
effort, to make sure that the directives and positions of a political Europe recognize ESHRE's members and the professional fertility sector in which they work. It is also clear
that common standards of practice can be set and improved
by guidelines and training, and these too remain an important
priority for ESHRE. Some precongress courses at ESHRE
annual meetings regularly attract more than 500 participants.
Membership of the Society now stands at more than 7000
and, as fertility treatment continues to gather public acceptance, those numbers are expected to grow, along with the
7 million babies whose conception has been achieved by
IVF since the birth of Louise Brown.
Acknowledgments: This article is written on behalf of the past
chairmen of ESHRE and with the approval of the immediate
past, present, and chairmen-elect.

FROM AMERICAN FERTILITY
SOCIETY TO AMERICAN SOCIETY
FOR REPRODUCTIVE MEDICINE:
THE SOCIETY AND ADVANCES IN
REPRODUCTIVE MEDICINE
Robert W. Rebar, M.D. and
Andrew R. LaBarbera, Ph.D.
We have been asked to end this issue on the occasion of the
40th anniversary of the ﬁrst birth resulting from in vitro

306
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
fertilization and embryo transfer by recounting the development and transformation of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) over this same time period. To do so
requires just a brief discussion of the earlier history of the
Society.

Beginnings of the society
The Society was ﬁrst organized as the American Society for
the Study of Human Sterility (with the word ‘‘Human’’
dropped in 1946) under the direction of Dr. Walter W. Williams as the President in Chicago in June 1944 (639). The
Society was incorporated in the state of California by one
of the founding members, Dr. Pendleton Tompkins. At
that time societies in general were comprised of members
with narrowly deﬁned interests but not necessarily with
special skills in any speciﬁc area. Societies were more
like gentlemen’s clubs (as almost all physicians in the
U.S. were men) where individuals with like interests might
meet and share information to improve their knowledge
and skills. The Society was organized for the express purpose of improving ‘‘. methods of diagnosis and treatment,
and the dissemination of reliable information concerning
fertility and sterility’’ (639). The original body of active
members was deﬁned as, ‘‘25 clinicians and scientists
who have made meritorious scientiﬁc contributions to the
subject of fertility’’ (639). This was the ﬁrst professional society devoted to reproductive medicine and remains the
largest such society today.
Volume 1, Number 1 of Fertility and Sterility was issued
in January 1950 as the, ‘‘Ofﬁcial Journal of The American Society for the Study of Sterility,’’ with Pendleton Tompkins as
editor. Subsequent editors included M. Edward Davis, Luigi
Mastroianni, Roger Kempers, Alan DeCherney, and the current co-editors Craig Niederberger and Antonio Pellicer. The
very ﬁrst article in that issue proved the value of the new journal being, ‘‘Dating the Endometrial Biopsy,’’ by Noyes RW,
Hertig AT, and Rock J (640). This journal continues to the present time as one of the most important journals in the medical
sciences.
From the outset, the Society encouraged international
membership and jointly sponsored the First World Congress
on Fertility and Sterility, New York City, May 1953. Led by
the Americans, 1,800 experts from 48 countries attended
the ﬁve-day congress (639).

Continued growth and development of the society
Through the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, the Society continued
to grow and to focus on both fertility and sterility. Especially
prominent early members included individuals such as John
MacLeod, Irving Stein, W.T. Pommerenke, Alan Guttmacher,
John Rock, Gregory Pincus, M.-C. Chang, Celso-Ramon Garcia, Luigi Mastroianni, S. Leon Israel, Robert B. Wilson, David
Danforth, Herbert Thomas, Melvin Taymor, Richard Blandau,
Kamran Moghissi, Veasy Buttram, Vernon Stevens, Edward
Wallach, Russell Malinak, S. Jan Behrman, Georgeanna
Seegar Jones, Bruce Stewart, Pierre Soupart, Edward Tyler,
Roger Kempers, Robert Visscher, William Andrews, Sheldon

Segal, John Sciarra, and Alvin Paulsen. It was in 1965 that
the Society changed its name ofﬁcially to the American
Fertility Society (AFS).
Of particular note in the history of in vitro fertilization
(IVF) is the fact that Dr. Rock and his Harvard colleague Dr.
Miriam Menkin are credited with the ﬁrst in vitro fertilization
of a human egg. Starting in the mid-1930s, Dr. Rock scheduled his surgeries to be performed at about the time of ovulation. Ovaries removed were examined and mature human
oocytes painstakingly identiﬁed and isolated by Dr. Menkin.
These harvested eggs were then mixed with human sperm
and incubated in the laboratory. After nearly six years of
trying, Dr. Menkin found an egg divided into two cells, but
it was lost in the preservation process. However, just a few
days later she found another fertilized egg and successfully
preserved it (639, 641, 642).
Expansion of the Society in the 1970s and 1980s was
probably facilitated by the decision of the American Board
of Obstetrics and Gynecology to develop subspecialties in
obstetrics and gynecology. The Society continued to diversify, developing a number of afﬁliated societies and professional and special interest groups. Quickly the AFS became
a society of societies, recognizing that the Society was
more inﬂuential as a coordinated group supporting all of
reproduction in males as well as in females. In 1977, the
Society opened its Public Affairs Ofﬁce in the headquarters
of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
in Washington, D.C., in its continuing efforts to inform and
inﬂuence public policy. The Society moved into its own
new ofﬁce headquarters building in Birmingham, AL,
in 1984.
Early advances in reproductive medicine highlighted in
both this journal and at annual meetings focused on the hormonal suppression of ovulation for contraception; ovulation
induction in anovulatory women; microsurgical approaches
to the treatment of endometriosis, ﬁbroids, and pelvic adhesions; and the use of cryopreserved sperm from donors to
assist couples in achieving a pregnancy. Fertility treatment
did not advance appreciably until the advent of in vitro fertilization in the late 1970s.

Changes facilitated by the advent of
in vitro fertilization
In 1985, fully seven years after the birth of Louise Brown, the
IVF Special Interest Group formed and then reorganized itself
into the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology (SART)
in 1987. This Society, together with the AFS, pioneered development of the ﬁrst U.S. medical registry, which reported
clinic-speciﬁc IVF outcome data. Later SART and the AFS
collaborated with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to publish the registry results in compliance with the
Fertility Clinics Success Rate and Certiﬁcation Act (Wyden
Act) of 1992. Registry data have continued to be systematically analyzed and published, with the data compiled by
SART arguably the most detailed and complete summaries
of human assisted reproduction outcomes in the world.
Contemporaneously the AFS constituted its Ethics Committee
to consider the philosophical and ethical issues arising from

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
307
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
the ability to collect, store, and fertilize gametes in vitro. This
Committee plays an important role in formulating ethical
guidelines for IVF clinics and for the management of reproductive issues while the Practice Committee promotes
evidence-based standards for clinical and laboratory practice.

A name change on the 50th anniversary
In 1994, at its 50th anniversary meeting, at the behest of President Leon Speroff, the Society ofﬁcially changed its name to the
American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) because of
the recognition that the Society encompassed all of reproductive
medicine, and not just fertility. Under the guidance of Dr. Herbert
Thomas and then Dr. Benjamin Younger, Executive Directors,
and with the leadership of successive presidents, the Society
continued to expand in scope and inﬂuence. American Society
for Reproductive Medicine initiated partnerships with other national and multinational medical societies in reproductive medicine, including the International Federation of Fertility
Societies (IFFS), the nascent European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE), the Asociaci
on Latinoamericanade Medicina Reproductiva (ALMER), the Middle East
Fertility Society (MEFS), and the Asociaci
on Mexicana de la Reproducci
on (AMMR). Several prominent ASRM members have
served as President of IFFS and helped solidify that society’s
ﬁnancial basis, including Dr. William Andrews, Dr. Roger Kempers, and Dr. Joe Leigh Simpson.

Expansion in the 21st century
Early in the 21st century, the administrative stewardship of the
Society changed, with Dr. Robert W. Rebar assuming the position of Executive Director, Nancy Frankel, the position of Chief
of Operations, and Dr. Andrew LaBarbera, the position of Scientiﬁc Director. Sean Tipton continued as Director of the J.
Benjamin Younger Ofﬁce of Public Affairs in Washington.
Their charge from the Board of Directors was clear: modernize
the administrative and educational functions of the Society to
better fulﬁll the needs of the members and enhance the global
stature of the Society. ASRM reformulated its mission statement, proclaiming itself a ‘‘multidisciplinary organization
dedicated to the advancement of the science and practice of
reproductive medicine.’’ The Society emphasized that its primary purpose was education and in a statement of purpose
noted that its intent was to advance reproductive medicine
through education, research, and advocacy. The Board outlined ﬁve speciﬁc elements in its strategic plan:
Visibility: Expand ASRM’s recognition beyond its preeminence in infertility and assisted reproductive
technology.
Education: Broaden the quality and value of educational
values.
Research: Encourage and facilitate the funding and visibility of research.
Membership: Preserve and enhance the vitality of
membership.
Finance and Administration: Sustain and improve ﬁnancial integrity and organizational structure.

To increase visibility, the Society undertook a series of initiatives during the ﬁrst decade of the 21st century. In this brief
overview, only a superﬁcial listing of these endeavors is possible.
The Society assumed editorial responsibility for the Journal of
Assisted Reproduction and Genetics, selected Dr. David Albertini
as its ﬁrst editor, and rebranded the Journal as one devoted to
basic and applied science in the ﬁeld of gamete, embryo and
stem cell biology. This Journal’s impact has increased signiﬁcantly under ASRM’s guardianship and Dr. Albertini’s vision,
providing scientists a unique forum to share advances in stem
cell research. The Society formalized exchanges of scientiﬁc program speakers with national and international professional organizations: the Society for the Study of Reproduction (SSR),
the American Association of Gynecologic Laparoscopists
(AAGL), the Society for Reproductive Investigation (SRI),
MEFS, the Chinese Society for Reproductive Medicine (CSRM),
the Indian Society for Assisted Reproduction (ISAR), ALMER,
the Asia Paciﬁc Initiative on Reproduction (ASPIRE), the International Menopause Society (IMS), and AMMR. The Society
broadened its annual meeting program to include emphases
on contraception, menopause and reproductive surgery while
at the same time reducing the burden of formal meeting activities to encourage more informal interaction. The Society organized a series of workshops with the Association of American
Law Schools to facilitate interdisciplinary discussion of the legal
issues surrounding ART. The Society redesigned and modernized
its website, created a second website targeted to the general public, and developed an active presence on social media. Jointly
with ESHRE, the Society co-sponsored three consensus workshops on polycystic ovary syndrome and published the ﬁndings
simultaneously in the journals of the respective societies. Moreover, ESHRE and ASRM initiated annual, now biennial, joint
‘‘Best of.’’ conferences alternating between Europe and North
America. The Society joined and actively participated in the
meetings of the Council of Medical Specialty Societies (CMSS),
an organization of 42 medical specialty societies representing
nearly 800,000 U.S. physicians, whose mission is to promote
continuous professional development and guide federal and
state healthcare policy. The Society played a more active role
in collaboration with U.S. and international government
agencies, putting on conferences together with the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Food and Drug Administration,
the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the National Academy of
Medicine, as well as with the World Health Organization (WHO)
and the Canadian government. Interactions with the WHO ultimately led to the recognition of ASRM as an ofﬁcial NonGovernmental Agency (NGA) of the WHO in early 2014. To solidify its impact in Washington, D.C., the Society expanded the
Ofﬁce of Public Affairs and advocated more actively with the
American Medical Association and the American Congress of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) on national issues of
importance in reproductive medicine.
The 21st century saw an explosion in new educational initiatives. A fundamental shift in emphasis of the Society’s educational program was the transition to interdisciplinary
education in recognition that reproductive care depends on the
collaborative partnership of all disciplines in the healthcare
team: physicians, nurses, laboratory scientists, mental health
professionals, lawyers, and practice managers. Moreover,

308
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
ASRM has expanded educational activities for medical practitioners at different levels of training. For example, the Resident
Reporter Program and medical student subsidies to attend the
annual congress encourage education about reproduction for
budding reproductive health professionals. The Society invested
signiﬁcant resources in the development of a robust on-demand
distance-learning program for continuous professional development. The program includes online modules and courses branded
as ‘‘ASRM eLearn’’ and its successor ‘‘ASRM airLearning.’’ Other
popular learning modalities are periodic webinars in reproductive endocrinology, nursing, reproductive ethics, and mental
health. These activities incorporate ample opportunity for interactive discussion and user participation. The Society also produced a multitude of new patient education materials,
including fact sheets, booklets, and ﬁlms that are readily available at no cost to the general public at www.ReproductiveFacts.org. Many of these materials have been translated into
Chinese, Spanish, and Portuguese. Educational materials for professionals and patients continue to rely on published scientiﬁc
evidence. The Practice Committee further reﬁned its procedures
for conducting rigorous systematic reviews of published evidence to formulate guidelines that comply with the standards
of the National Guideline Clearinghouse of the U.S. Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). These enhancements
in guideline development have strengthened the ASRM recommendations for clinical practice and led to ASRM’s participation
in the Choosing Wisely campaign, an initiative of the American
Board of Internal Medicine Foundation in partnership with Consumer Reports. More recently, ASRM has joined other surgical
societies in expanding its focus on skills-building training with
the invention and deployment of the ASRM Embryo Transfer
Simulator.
The Society embarked on major new research initiatives,
devoting signiﬁcant ﬁnancial resources to funding research projects of high priority to the advancement of reproductive medicine and biology. The Society now awards grants to research
proposals deemed worthy by the ASRM Research Committee.
Presentations of the results of these projects are given special
recognition at the Scientiﬁc Congress. In addition, the Congress
includes special prize paper sessions. The Society for many years
has recognized outstanding accomplishment in scientiﬁc
research through the Distinguished Researcher and the Ira and
Ester Rosenwaks New Investigator awards. To foster the entry
of new clinician-researchers into participation in clinical
research projects, ASRM has partnered with the Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) and Duke University to administer the Clinical
Reproductive Endocrinology Scientist Training (CREST) Program. Graduates of this program for physicians in the practice
of reproductive medicine contribute to scientiﬁc knowledge in
the ﬁeld. Finally, the Society also has supported and helped
develop NICHD workshops, Gordon Conferences, Testis Workshops, and the 2016 ‘‘Summit on Environment, Reproductive,
Nutritional and Genetic Factors Affecting Reproduction’’ organized jointly with the SSR.
To promote the involvement of and interaction among
members, the Society installed and recently upgraded interactive association management software. Many of the special
interest groups, professional groups, and afﬁliated societies

have taken advantage of new opportunities for engagement
with online bulletin boards, newsletters, and eblasts. Online
voting increased membership involvement in leadership decisions. The Society also became one of the societies awarding
the Gold Humanism Award to a member making special contributions in the ﬁeld.
Expansion of the administrative staff and remodeling of the
physical facilities were necessary to implement the initiatives
described above. The move to a virtually ‘‘paperless’’ scientiﬁc
congress and pre-congress courses greatly increased efﬁciency
and timeliness and reduced expenses. In recognition of the
industry-wide decline in commercial support for educational activities not targeted to product promotion, the ASRM initiated a
long-term Fund Development Program. During the ﬁrst ﬁve
years of this program, the Society established over $4 million
in endowments to help ensure the future success of the Society’s
mission. Interestingly, as reproductive medicine in the U.S.
evolved into the domain of physicians speciﬁcally trained in
reproductive endocrinology or reproductive urology, general
obstetrician-gynecologists, and urologists drifted away from
the Society and membership declined. However, the recognition
by WHO that ‘‘Reproductive rights rest on the recognition of the
basic right of all couples and individuals to decide freely and
responsibly the number, spacing and timing of their children
and to have the information and means to do so, and the right
of all to make decisions concerning reproduction free of discrimination, coercion and violence’’ (643) has served to make the provision of reproductive services of importance worldwide. This
has provided new global opportunities for ASRM.

Final thoughts
The future of reproductive medicine is bright. Recent advances in genetics and stem cell biology suggest that research
advances in this ﬁeld will only accelerate in the years ahead
and will almost certainly result in novel approaches to treating infertility in males and females. Assisted reproductive
technologies have advanced our knowledge of gamete
biology and of early embryonic development. There is still
much to learn, and it seems safe to predict that the annual scientiﬁc congresses of the ASRM will continue to be exciting
meetings presenting new scientiﬁc advances in the ﬁeld.

REFERENCES
1.

2.
3.

4.

5.

6.
7.

Holmes B. 1978 in pictures: Why it was the best year so far. Available at:
https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn23850-1978-in-pictures-why-itwas-the-best-year-so-far. Accessed April 28, 2018.
Steptoe PC, Edwards RG. Birth after the reimplantation of a human embryo. Lancet 1978;2:366.
Cohen J, Alikani M, Bisignano A. Past performance of assisted reproduction
technologies as a model to predict future progress: a proposed addendum
to Moore's law. Reprod Biomed Online 2012;25:585–90.
Elder K, Johnson MH. The Oldham Notebooks: an analysis of the development of IVF 1969-1978. II. The treatment cycles and their outcomes. Reprod Biomed Soc Online 2015;1:9–18.
Purdy JM. Methods for fertilization and embryo culture in vitro. In:
Edwards RG, Purdy JM, editors. Human conception in vitro. London: Academic Press; 1982:135–48.
Brinster RL. A method for in vitro cultivation of mouse ova from two-cell to
blastocyst. Exp Cell Res 1963;32:205–8.
Alikani M, Go KJ, McCaffrey C, McCulloh DH. Comprehensive evaluation
of contemporary assisted reproduction technology laboratory operations

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
309
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

8.
9.
10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.
21.
22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

to determine stafﬁng levels that promote patient safety and quality care.
Fertil Steril 2014;102:1350–6.
Whittingham DG, Leibo SP, Mazur P. Survival of mouse embryos frozen to
-196 degrees and -269 degrees C. Science 1972;178:411–4.
Gordon JW, Talansky BE. Assisted fertilization by zona drilling: a mouse
model for correction of oligospermia. J Exp Zool 1986;239:347–54.
Cohen J, Malter H, Fehilly C, Wright G, Elsner C, Kort H, et al. Implantation
of embryos after partial opening of oocyte zona pellucida to facilitate
sperm penetration. Lancet 1988;16:162.
Palermo G, Joris H, Devroey P, van Steirteghem AC. Pregnancies after intracytoplasmic injection of single spermatozoon into an oocyte. Lancet 1992;
340:17–8.
Handyside AH, Pattinson JK, Penketh RJ, Delhanty JD, Winston RM,
Tuddenham EG. Biopsy of human preimplantation embryos and sexing
by DNA ampliﬁcation. Lancet 1989;1:347–9.
Gardner RL, Edwards RG. Control of the sex ratio at full term in the rabbit
by transferring sexed blastocysts. Nature 1968;218:346–9.
Saiki RK, Scharf S, Faloona F, Mullis KB, Horn GT, Erlich HA, et al. Enzymatic
ampliﬁcation of b-globin genomic sequences and restriction site analysis
for diagnosis of sickle cell anemia. Science 1985;230:1350–4.
Munn
e S, Sultan KM, Weier HU, Grifo JA, Cohen J, Rosenwaks Z. Assessment
of numeric abnormalities of X, Y, 18, and 16 chromosomes in preimplantation
human embryos before transfer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1191–9.
Gardner DK, Lane M. Embryo culture systems. In: Gardner DK, Simon C,
editors. Handbook of in vitro fertilization. 4th ed. Boca Raton, Florida:
CRC Press; 2017:205–44.
Adashi EY, Barri PN, Berkowitz R, Braude P, Bryan E, Carr J, et al. Infertility
therapy-associated multiple pregnancies (births): an ongoing epidemic. Reprod Biomed Online 2003;7:515–42.
Menezo Y, Testart J, Perrone D. Serum is not necessary in human in vitro
fertilization, early embryo culture, and transfer. Fertil Steril 1984;42:750–5.
Quinn P, Kerin JF, Warnes GM. Improved pregnancy rate in human in vitro
fertilization with the use of a medium based on the composition of human
tubal ﬂuid. Fertil Steril 1985;44:493–8.
Gardner DK, Kelley RL. Impact of the IVF laboratory environment on human
preimplantation embryo phenotype. J Dev Origins Health Dis 2017;8:418–35.
Barnes FL. The effects of the early uterine environment on the subsequent
development of embryo and fetus. Theriogenology 2000;53:649–58.
Gardner DK, Lane M, Calderon I, Leeton J. Environment of the preimplantation human embryo in vivo: metabolite analysis of oviduct and uterine
ﬂuids and metabolism of cumulus cells. Fertil Steril 1996;65:349–53.
Gardner DK, Lane M. Towards a single embryo transfer. Reprod Biomed
Online 2003;6:470–81.
Gardner DK, Schoolcraft WB, Wagley L, Schlenker T, Stevens J, Helsa J. Culture and transfer of human blastocysts to increase implantation rate elminate high order multiple gestations: a prospective randomised trial. Hum
Reprod 1998;13:3434–40.
Biggers JD, Racowsky C. The development of fertilized human ova to the
blastocyst stage in KSOM(AA) medium: is a two-step protocol necessary?
Reprod Biomed Online 2002;5:133–40.
Wale PL, Gardner DK. The effects of chemical and physical factors on
mammalian embryo culture and their importance for the practice of assisted human reproduction. Hum Reprod Update 2016;22:2–22.
Sfontouris IA, Martins WP, Nastri CO, Viana IG, Navarro PA, RaineFenning N, et al. Blastocyst culture using single versus sequential media
in clinical IVF: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. J Assist Reprod Genet 2016;33:1261–72.
Christianson MS, Zhao Y, Shoham G, Granot I, Safran A, Khafagy A, et al.
Embryo catheter loading and embryo culture techniques: results of a
worldwide Web-based survey. J Assist Reprod Genet 2014;31:1029–36.
Maheshwari A, Hamilton M, Bhattacharya S. Should we be promoting embryo transfer at blastocyst stage? Reprod Biomed Online 2016;32:142–6.
Papanikolaou EG, Camus M, Fatemi HM, Tournaye H, Verheyen G, van
Steirteghem A, et al. Early pregnancy loss is signiﬁcantly higher after day 3
single embryo transfer than after day 5 single blastocyst transfer in GnRH
antagonist stimulated IVF cycles. Reprod Biomed Online 2006;12:60–5.
Cohen J, Edwards RG, Fehilly CB, Fishel SB, Hewitt J, Rowland G, et al.
Treatment of male infertility by in vitro fertilization: factors affecting fertilization and pregnancy. Acta Eur Fertil 1984;15:10.

32.
33.

Kiessling AA, Loutradis D, McShane PM, Jackson KV. Fertilization in trypsintreated oocytes. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1988;541:614–20.
Tucker MJ, Bishop FM, Cohen J, Wiker SR, Wright G. Routine application
of partial zona dissection for male factor infertility. Hum Reprod 1991;6:676–81.

34.

Malter HE, Cohen J. Partial zona dissection of the human oocyte: a nontraumatic method using micromanipulation to assist zona pellucida penetration. Fertil Steril 1989;51:139–48.

35.

Ng SC, Bongso A, Ratnam SS, Sathananthan H, Chan CL, Wong PC, et al. Pregnancy after transfer of sperm under zona. Lancet (London, Engl) 1988;2:790.

36.

Lanzendorf SE, Maloney MK, Veeck LL, Slusser J, Hodgen GD, Rosenwaks Z.
A preclinical evaluation of pronuclear formation by microinjection of human
spermatozoa into human oocytes. Fertil Steril 1988;49:835–42.

37.

Palermo G, Munne S, Cohen J. The human zygote inherits its mitotic potential from the male gamete. Hum Reprod 1994;9:1220–5.
Fishel S, Antinori S, Jackson P, Johnson J, Rinaldi L. Presentation of six pregnancies established by sub-zonal insemination (SUZI). Hum Reprod 1991;6:124–30.
Palermo G, van Steirteghem A. Enhancement of acrosome reaction and
subzonal insemination of a single spermatozoon in mouse eggs. Mol Reprod Dev 1991;30:339–45.

38.
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.
45.

46.

47.
48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.
55.

Palermo G, Joris H, Devroey P, van Steirteghem AC. Induction of acrosome
reaction in human spermatozoa used for subzonal insemination. Hum Reprod 1992;7:248–54.
Palermo GD, O'Neill CL, Chow S, Cheung S, Parrella A, Pereira N, et al. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection: state of the art in humans. Reproduction
2017;154:F93–110.
Palermo G, Joris H, Devroey P, van Steirteghem AC. Pregnancies after intracytoplasmic injection of single spermatozoon into an oocyte. Lancet 1992;
340:17–8.
Dyer S, Chambers GM, de Mouzon J, Nygren KG, Zegers-Hochschild F,
Mansour R, et al. International Committee for Monitoring Assisted Reproductive Technologies world report: assisted reproductive technology 2008,
2009 and 2010. Hum Reprod 2016;31:1588–609.
Nagamatsu G, Hayashi K. Stem cells, in vitro gametogenesis and male
fertility. Reproduction 2017;154:F79–91.
Pereira N, O’Neill C, Lu V, Rosenwaks Z, Gianpiero DP. The safety of intracytoplasmic sperm injection and long-term outcomes. Reproduction 2017;
154:F61–70.
Martinez F. Update on fertility preservation from the Barcelona International
Society for Fertility Preservation-ESHRE-ASRM 2015 expert meeting: indications, results and future perspectives. Fertil Steril 2017;108:407–15.e11.
Donnez J, Dolmans MM. Fertility preservation in women. N Engl J Med
2017;377:1657–65.
Garcia-Velasco JA, Domingo J, Cobo A, Martinez M, Carmona L, Pellicer A.
Five years' experience using oocyte vitriﬁcation to preserve fertility for medical and nonmedical indications. Fertil Steril 2013;99:1994–9.
Rienzi L, Gracia C, Maggiulli R, LaBarbera AR, Kaser DJ, Ubaldi FM, et al. Oocyte,
embryo and blastocyst cryopreservation in ART: systematic review and metaanalysis comparing slow-freezing versus vitriﬁcation to produce evidence for
the development of global guidance. Hum Reprod Update 2017;23:139–55.
Cobo A, Meseguer M, Remohi J, Pellicer A. Use of cryo-banked oocytes in
an ovum donation programme: a prospective, randomized, controlled,
clinical trial. Hum Reprod 2010;25:2239–46.
Cobo A, Garrido N, Crespo J, Jose R, Pellicer A. Accumulation of oocytes: a
new strategy for managing low-responder patients. Reprod Biomed Online
2012;24:424–32.
Rienzi L, Cobo A, Paffoni A, Scarduelli C, Capalbo A, Vajta G, et al. Consistent and predictable delivery rates after oocyte vitriﬁcation: an observational
longitudinal cohort multicentric study. Hum Reprod 2012;27:1606–12.
Doyle JO, Richter KS, Lim J, Stillman RJ, Graham JR, Tucker MJ. Successful
elective and medically indicated oocyte vitriﬁcation and warming for autologous in vitro fertilization, with predicted birth probabilities for fertility
preservation according to number of cryopreserved oocytes and age at
retrieval. Fertil Steril 2016;105:459–66.e2.
Stoop D, Cobo A, Silber S. Fertility preservation for age-related fertility
decline. Lancet 2014;384:1311–9.
Cobo A, Garcia-Velasco JA. Why all women should freeze their eggs. Curr
Opin Obstet Gynecol 2016;28:206–10.

310
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
56.

57.

58.

59.
60.
61.
62.
63.

64.

65.

66.
67.
68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.
74.

75.
76.

77.
78.
79.
80.

Stoop D, Nekkebroeck J, Devroey P. A survey on the intentions and attitudes towards oocyte cryopreservation for non-medical reasons among
women of reproductive age. Hum Reprod 2011;26:655–61.
Hodes-Wertz B, Druckenmiller S, Smith M, Noyes N. What do reproductiveage women who undergo oocyte cryopreservation think about the process
as a means to preserve fertility? Fertil Steril 2013;100:1343–9.
Cobo A, Garcia-Velasco JA, Coello A, Domingo J, Pellicer A, Remohi J.
Oocyte vitriﬁcation as an efﬁcient option for elective fertility preservation.
Fertil Steril 2016;105:755–64.e8.
Homburg R, van der Veen F, Silber SJ. Oocyte vitriﬁcation—Women's
emancipation set in stone. Fertil Steril 2009;91(4 Suppl):1319–20.
Yavin S, Arav A. Measurement of essential physical properties of vitriﬁcation solutions. Theriogenology 2007;67:81–9.
Seki S, Mazur P. Effect of warming rate on the survival of vitriﬁed mouse oocytes
and on the recrystallization of intracellular ice. Biol Reprod 2008;79:727–37.
Arav A. Vitriﬁcation of oocyte and embryos. In: Lauria AGF, editor. New trends
in embrvo transfer. Cambridge, England: Portland Press; 1992:255–64.
Cobo A, Bellver J, de los Santos MJ, Remohi J. Viral screening of spent culture media and liquid nitrogen samples of oocytes and embryos from hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeﬁciency virus chronically infected
women undergoing in vitro fertilization cycles. Fertil Steril 2012;97:74–8.
Papatheodorou A, Vanderzwalmen P, Panagiotidis Y, Petousis S, Gullo G,
Kasapi E, et al. How does closed system vitriﬁcation of human oocytes affect
the clinical outcome? A prospective, observational, cohort, noninferiority
trial in an oocyte donation program. Fertil Steril 2016;106:1348–55.
De Munck N, Santos-Ribeiro S, Stoop D, van de Velde H, Verheyen G. Open
versus closed oocyte vitriﬁcation in an oocyte donation programme: a prospective randomized sibling oocyte study. Hum Reprod 2016;31:377–84.
Mesen TB, Mersereau JE, Kane JB, Steiner AZ. Optimal timing for elective
egg freezing. Fertil Steril 2015;103:1551–6.e1–4.
Waldby C. 'Banking time': egg freezing and the negotiation of future
fertility. Cult Health Sex 2015;17:470–82.
Goldman RH, Racowsky C, Farland LV, Munne S, Ribustello L, Fox JH. Predicting the likelihood of live birth for elective oocyte cryopreservation: a
counseling tool for physicians and patients. Hum Reprod 2017;32:853–9.
Cil AP, Bang H, Oktay K. Age-speciﬁc probability of live birth with oocyte
cryopreservation: an individual patient data meta-analysis. Fertil Steril
2013;100:492–9.e3.
Morin SJ, Franasiak JM, Juneau CR, Scott RT. Live birth rate following embryo transfer is signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the physician performing the
transfer: date from 2707 euploid blastocyst transfers by 11 physicians. Fertil Steril 2016;106:e25.
Heitmann RJ, Hill MJ, Csokmay JM, Pilgrim J, DeCherney AH, Deering S. ET
simulation improves pregnancy rates and decreases time to proﬁciency in
Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility fellow embryo transfers. Fertil
Steril 2017;107:1166–72.e1.
Pope CS, Cook EKD, Arny M, Novak A, Grow DR. Inﬂuence of embryo
transfer depth on in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer outcomes. Fertil
Steril 2004;81:51–8.
Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine.
Performing the embryo transfer: a guideline. Fertil Steril 2017;107:882–96.
Toma C, Tikkinen K, Tuomivaara L, Tapanainen JS, Martikainen H. The degree of difﬁculty of embryo transfer is an independent factor for predicting
pregnancy. Hum Reprod 2002;17:2632–5.
Sallam HN, Sadek SS. Ultrasound-guided embryo transfer: a meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Fertil Steril 2003;80:1042–6.
Porat N, Boehnlein LM, Schouweiler CM, Kang J, Lindheim SR. Interim analysis
of a randomized clinical trial comparing abdominal versus transvaginal
ultrasound-guided embryo transfer. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2010;36:384–92.
Buckett WM. A review and meta-analysis of prospective trials comparing
different catheters used for embryo transfer. Fertil Steril 2006;85:728–34.
Eytan O, Elad D, Jaffa AJ. Bioengineering studies of the embryo transfer
procedure. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007;1101:21–37.
Conﬁno E, Zhang J, Risquez F. Air bubble migration is a random event post
embryo transfer. J Assist Reprod Genet 2007;24:223–6.
Abou-Setta AM. Air ﬂuid versus ﬂuid-only models of embryo catheter loading:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Biomed Online 2007;14:80–4.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.
94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.
100.
101.

102.

Montag M, Kupka M, van der Ven K, van der Ven H. ET on day 3 using
low versus high ﬂuid volume. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2002;
102:57–60.
€lz W, Tews G. The inefEbner T, Yaman C, Moser M, Sommergruber M, Po
fective loading process of the embryo transfer catheter alters implantation
and pregnancy rates. Fertil Steril 2001;76:630–2.
Quinn P, Warnes GM, Kerin JF, Kirby C. Culture factors in relation to the
success of human in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer. Fertil Steril
1984;41:202–9.
Bontekoe S, Johnson N, Blake D. Adherence compounds in embryo transfer media for assisted reproductive technologies. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2014;2:CD007421.
Craciunas L, Tsampras N, Coomarasamy A, Raine-Fenning N. Intrauterine
administration of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) for subfertile
women undergoing assisted reproduction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2016;5:CD011537.
Grygoruk C, Pietrewicz P, Modlinski JA, Gajda B, Greda P, Grad I, et al. Inﬂuence of embryo transfer on embryo preimplantation development. Fertil
Steril 2012;97:1417–21.
sito A, Rodriguez-Escudero FJ. Inﬂuence of
Matorras R, Mendoza R, Expo
the time interval between embryo catheter loading and discharging on
the success of IVF. Hum Reprod 2004;19:2027–30.
Shapiro BS, Daneshmand ST, Garner FC, Aguirre M, Hudson C, Thomas S. Evidence of impaired endometrial receptivity after ovarian stimulation for in vitro
fertilization: a prospective randomized trial comparing fresh and frozenthawed embryo transfer in normal responders. Fertil Steril 2011;96:344–8.
van der Linden M, Buckingham K, Farquhar C, Kremer JAM, Metwally M.
Luteal phase support for assisted reproduction cycles. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2011;6(10):CD009154.
Groenewoud ER, Cantineau AE, Kollen BJ, Macklon NS, Cohlen BJ. What is
the optimal means of preparing the endometrium in frozen–thawed embryo transfer cycles? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod
Update 2013;19:458–70.
Glujovsky D, Pesce R, Fiszbajn G, Sueldo C, Hart RJ, Ciapponi A. Endometrial preparation for women undergoing embryo transfer with frozen embryos or embryos derived from donor oocytes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2010;1(3):CD009517.
Nastri CO, Gibreel A, Raine-Fenning N, Maheshwari A, Ferriani RA,
Bhattacharya S, Martins WP. Endometrial injury in women undergoing assisted
reproductive techniques. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;3:CD009517.
Purcell KJ, Schembri M, Telles TL, Fujimoto VY, Cedars MI. Bed rest after embryo transfer: a randomized controlled trial. Fertil Steril 2007;87:1322–6.
Gaikwad S, Garrido N, Cobo A, Pellicer A, Remohi J. Bed rest after embryo
transfer negatively affects in vitro fertilization: a randomized controlled
clinical trial. Fertil Steril 2013;100:729–35.
Gerris J, De Neubourg D, Mangelschots K, Van Royen E, Van de Meerssche M,
Valkenburg M. Prevention of twin pregnancy after in-vitro fertilization or intracytoplasmic sperm injection based on strict embryo criteria: a prospective randomized clinical trial. Hum Reprod 1999;14:2581–7.
Gerris J, De Neubourg D, Mangelschots K, Van Royen E, Vercruyssen M,
Barudy-Vasquez J, et al. Elective single day 3 embryo transfer halves the
twinning rate without decrease in the ongoing pregnancy rate of an IVF/
ICSI programme. Hum Reprod 2002;17:2626–31.
Martikainen H, Orava M, Lakkakorpi J, Tuomivaara L. Day 2 elective single
embryo transfer in clinical practice: better outcome in ICSI cycles. Hum Reprod 2004;19:1364–6.
Mastroyannis C. Gamete intrafallopian transfer: ethical considerations, historical development of the procedure, and comparison with other
advanced reproductive technologies. Fertil Steril 1993;60:389–402.
Meirow D, Schenker JG. Appraisal of gamete intrafallopian transfer. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1995;58:59–65.
Gamete intrafallopian transfer. Fertil Steril 1994;62(Suppl 1):38–9.
Raneiri M, Beckett VA, Marchant S, Kinis A, Serhal P. Gamete intra fallopian
transfer or in vitro fertilization after failed ovarian stimulation and intrauterine insemination in unexplained infertility. Hum Reprod 1995;10:2023–6.
Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology, American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Assisted reproductive technology in the United States

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
311
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.
109.

110.

111.

112.
113.

114.

115.
116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.
122.

123.

and Canada: 1994 results generated from the American Society for Reproductive Medicine/Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology Registry.
Fertil Steril 1996;66:697–705.
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion.
2015 Assisted reproductive technology success rates: Figures from the
2015 Assisted Reproductive Technology National Summary Report. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/art/pdf/2015-national-summary-slides/ART_
2015_graphs_and_charts.pdf.
Levran D, Mashiach S, Dor J, Levron J, Farhi J. Zygote intrafallopian transfer
may improve pregnancy rate in patients with repeated failure of implantation. Fertil Steril 1998;69:26–30.
Malter HE, Cohen J. Partial zona dissection of the human oocyte: a nontraumatic method using micromanipulation to assist zona pellucida penetration. Fertil Steril 1989;51:139–48.
Sakkas D. IVF treatment of moderate male factor infertility: A comparison
of mini-Percoll, partial zona dissection and sub-zonal sperm insertion techniques. Hum Reprod 1993;8:587.
Laws-King A, Trounson A, Sathananthan AH, Kola I. Fertilisation of human
oocytes by micro-injection of a single spermatozooan under the zona pellucida. Fertil Steril 1987;48:637–42.
Ng SC. Microinjection of human oocytes: a technique for severe oligoasthenoteratozoospermia. Fertil Steril 1991;56:1117.
Sakkas D, Lacham O, Gianaroli L, Trounson A. Subzonal sperm microinjection in cases of severe male factor infertility and repeated in vitro fertilization failure. Fertil Steril 1992;57:1279–88.
Palermo G, Joris H, Devroey P, Van Steirteghem AC. Pregnancies after intracytoplasmic injection of single spermatozoon into the oocyte. Lancet
1991;340:17–8.
Levran D. A randomized study of intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)
versus subzonal insemination (SUZI) for the management of severe malefactor infertility. J Assist Reprod Gen 1995;12:319.
Wang J. In vitro fertilization (IVF): A review of 3 decades of clinical innovation and technological advancement. Ther Clin Risk Manag 2006;2:355.
Boulet SL, Mehta A, Kissin DM, Warner L, Kawwass JF, Jamieson DJ. Trends
in use of and reproductive outcomes associated with intracytoplasmic
sperm injection. JAMA 2015;313:255–63.
Tan SL, Betts J, Mason B, Edwards RG, Campbell S, Royston P, et al. Cumulative conception and livebirth rates after in-vitro fertilisation. Lancet 1992;
339:1390–4.
Edwards R, Patrizio P, Edgar D, Field C, Brinton L. Deﬁning IVF terminology.
Reprod Biomed Online 2007;14:553–4.
Chian R-C, G€
ulekli B, Buckett WM, Tan S-L. Priming with human chorionic
gonadotropin before retrieval of immature oocytes in women with infertility
due to the polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1624–6.
Willis DS, Watson H, Mason HD, Galea R, Brincat M, Franks S. Premature
response to luteinizing hormone of granulosa cells from anovulatory
women with polycystic ovary syndrome: Relevance to mechanism of anovulation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:3984–91.
Chian RC, Buckett WM, Tulandi T, Tan SL. Prospective randomized study of
human chorionic gonadotrophin priming before immature oocyte retrieval
from unstimulated women with polycystic ovarian syndrome. Hum Reprod
2000;15:165–70.
Sanchez F, Lolicato F, Romero S, De Vos M, Van Ranst H, Verheyen G, et al.
An improved IVM method for cumulus-oocyte complexes from small follicles in polycystic ovary syndrome patients enhances oocyte competence
and embryo yield. Hum Reprod 2017;32:2056–68.
Buckett WM, Chian RC, Holzer H, Dean N, Usher R, Tan SL. Obstetric outcomes
and congenital abnormalities after in vitro maturation, in vitro fertilization, and
intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Obstet Gynecol 2007;110:885–91.
Tan SL, Chian RC, Buckett WM, eds. In-vitro maturation of human oocytes:
Basic science to clinical applications. 1st ed. Oxford: Taylor & Francis.
Walls ML, Hunter T, Ryan JP, Keelan JA, Nathan E, Hart RJ. In vitro maturation as an alternative to standard in vitro fertilization for patients diagnosed
with polycystic ovaries: A comparative analysis of fresh, frozen and cumulative cycle outcomes. Hum Reprod 2015;30:88–96.
Dahan MH, Ata B, Rosenberg R, Chung JT, Son WY, Tan SL. Collection
of 125 oocytes in an in vitro maturation cycle using a new oocyte

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.
135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.
142.
143.

collection technique: A case report. J Obstet Gynaecol Canada 2014;
36:900–3.
Telfer EE, Zelinski MB. Ovarian follicle culture: Advances and challenges for human and non-human primates. Fertil Steril 2013;99:
1523–33.
Rose BI, Laky D. A comparison of the Cook single lumen immature ovum
IVM needle to the Steiner-Tan pseudo double lumen ﬂushing needle for
oocyte retrieval for IVM. J Assist Reprod Genet 2013;30:855–60.
Seyhan A, Ata B, Polat M, Son W-Y, Yarali H, Dahan MH. Severe early
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome following GnRH agonist trigger with
the addition of 1500 IU hCG. Hum Reprod 2013;28:2522–8.
Iliodromiti S, Blockeel C, Tremellen KP, Fleming R, Tournaye H,
Humaidan P, et al. Consistent high clinical pregnancy rates and low ovarian
hyperstimulation syndrome rates in high-risk patients after GnRH agonist
triggering and modiﬁed luteal support: a retrospective multicentre study.
Hum Reprod 2013;28:2529–36.
Iliodromiti S, Lan VT, Tuong HM, Tuan PH, Humaidan P, Nelson SM. Impact
of GnRH agonist triggering and intensive luteal steroid support on live-birth
rates and OHSS: a retrospective cohort study. J Ovarian Res 2013;6:93.
Fatemi HM, Popovic-Todorovic B, Humaidan P, Kol S, Banker M, Devroey P,
et al. Severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome after gonadotropinreleasing hormone (GnRH) agonist trigger and ‘‘freeze-all’’ approach in
GnRH antagonist protocol. Fertil Steril 2014;101:1008–11.
Gurbuz AS, Gode F, Ozcimen N, Isik AZ. Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist trigger and freeze-all strategy does not prevent severe
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: A report of three cases. Reprod Biomed Online 2014;29:541–4.
Ling LP, Phoon JWL, Lau MSK, Chan JKY, Viardot-Foucault V, Tan TY, et al.
GnRH agonist trigger and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: Relook at
‘‘freeze-all strategy’’. Reprod Biomed Online 2014;29:392–4.
Hatırnaz S, Hatırnaz E, Dahan MH, Tan SL, Ozer A, Kanat-Pektas M, et al. Is
elective single-embryo transfer a viable treatment policy in in vitro maturation cycles? Fertil Steril 2016;106:1691–5.
Chian RC, Huang JY, Gilbert L, Son WY, Holzer H, Cui SJ, et al. Obstetric
outcomes following vitriﬁcation of in vitro and in vivo matured oocytes. Fertil Steril 2009;91:2391–8.
Rao GD, Chian RC, Son WS, Gilbert L, Tan SL. Fertility preservation in
women undergoing cancer treatment. Lancet 2004;363:1829–30.
Demirtas E, Elizur SE, Holzer H, Gidoni Y, Son WY, Chian RC, et al. Immature oocyte retrieval in the luteal phase to preserve fertility in women with
cancer facing imminent gonadotoxic therapy: It is worth a try. Reprod Biomed Online 2008;17:520–3.
Bretherick KL, Fairbrother N, Avila L, Harbord SH, Robinson WP. Fertility
and aging: Do reproductive-aged Canadian women know what they
need to know? Fertil Steril 2010;93:2162–8.
Moawad AR, Tan SL, Xu B, Chen HY, Taketo T. L-carnitine supplementation during vitriﬁcation of mouse oocytes at the germinal vesicle stage
improves preimplantation development following maturation and fertilization in vitro. Biol Reprod 2013;88:104.
Moawad AR, Xu B, Tan SL, Taketo T. l-carnitine supplementation during vitriﬁcation of mouse germinal vesicle stage-oocytes and their subsequent in vitro maturation improves meiotic spindle conﬁguration and
mitochondrial distribution in metaphase II oocytes. Hum Reprod 2014;
29:2256–68.
Trounson A, Leeton J, Besanko M, Wood C, Conti A. Pregnancy established
in an infertile patient after transfer of a donated embryo fertilised in vitro.
Br Med J 1983;286:835–8.
Lutjen P, Trounson A, Leeton J, Findlay J, Wood C, Renou P. The establishment
and maintenance of pregnancy using in vitro fertilization and embryo donation
in a patient with primary ovarian failure. Nature 1984;307:174–5.
Heape W. Preliminary note on the transplantation and growth of mammalian ova within a uterine foster mother. Proc R Soc Lond 1890;48:457.
Rosenwaks Z. Donor eggs: their application in modern reproductive technologies. Fertil Steril 1987;47:895–909.
Bustillo M, Buster JE, Cohen SW, Thorneycroft IH, Simon JA, Boyers SP,
et al. Nonsurgical ovum transfer as a treatment in infertile women.
JAMA 1984;251:1171–3.

312
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
144.

145.
146.

147.
148.

149.

150.
151.
152.

153.

154.

155.
156.

157.

158.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

Sauer MV, Macaso TM, Ishida EH, Giudice L, Marshall JR, Buster JE. Pregnancy following nonsurgical donor ovum transfer to a functionally agonadal woman. Fertil Steril 1987;48:324–5.
Formigli L, Formigli G, Roccio C. Donation of fertilized uterine ova to infertile women. Fertil Steril 1987;47:1–5.
Carson SA, Smigh AL, Scoggan JL, Buster JE. Superovulation fails to increase human blastocyst yield after uterine lavage. Prenat Diagn 1991;
11:513–22.
Sauer MV, Anderson RE, Paulson RJ. A trial of superovulation in ovum donors undergoing uterine lavage. Fertil Steril 1989;51:131–4.
Sauer MV, Paulson RJ, Macaso TM, Francis-Hernandez M, Lobo RA. Establishment of a nonanonymous donor oocyte program: preliminary experience at
the University of Southern California. Fertil Steril 1989;52:433–6.
Sauer MV, Paulson RJ, Lobo RA. A preliminary report on oocyte donation
extending reproductive potential to women over 40. N Engl J Med 1990;
232:1157–60.
Sauer MV, Paulson RJ, Lobo RA. Pregnancy after age 50: Application of oocyte
donation to women after natural menopause. Lancet 1993;341:321–3.
Paulson RJ. Hormonal induction of endometrial receptivity. Fertil Steril
2011;96:530–5.
Miles RA, Paulson RJ, Lobo RA, Press MF, Dahmoush L, Sauer MV. Pharmacokinetics and endometrial tissue levels of progesterone after administration by intramuscular and vaginal routes: A comparative study. Fertil
Steril 1994;62:485–90.
Navot D, Scott RT, Droesch K, Veeck LL, Liu HC, Rosenwaks Z. The window
of embryo transfer and the efﬁciency of human conception in vitro. Fertil
Steril 1991;55:114–8.
The Practice Committees of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine and the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology. Mature oocyte
cryopreservation: A guideline. Fertil Steril 2013;99:37–43.
Cohen IG, Daley GQ, Adashi EY. Disruptive reproductive technologies. Sci
Transl Med 2017;92:923–6.
Utian WH, Sheahan L, Goldfarb JM, Kiwi R. Successful pregnancy after
in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer from an infertile woman to a surrogate. N Engl J Med 1985;313:1351–2.
Perkins KM, Boulet SL, Jamieson DJ, Kissin DM. Trends and
outcomes of gestational surrogacy in the United States. Fertil Steril 2016;
106:435–42.
Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine,
Practice Committee of the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technologies.
Recommendations for practices using gestational carriers: a committee
opinion. Fertil Steril 2017;107:e3–10.
Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology. 2010 and 2011 SART
fertility success rate report. Available at: http://www.sart.org/
SART_Success_Rates.
Woo I, Hindoyan R, Landay M, Ho J, Ingles SA, McGinnis LK, et al. Perinatal
outcomes after natural conception versus in vitro fertilization (IVF) in gestational surrogates: A model to evaluate IVF treatment versus maternal effects. Fertil Steril 2017;108:993–8.
Murugappan G, Farland L, Missmer S, Correia K, Anchan R, Ginsburg E.
Gestational carrier in assisted reproductive technology. Fertil Steril 2018;
109:420–8.
Brannstrom M, Johannesson L, Dahm-Kahler P, Enskog A, Molne J,
Kvarnstrom N, et al. First clinical uterus transplantation trial: A six-month
report. Fertil Steril 2014;101:1228–36.
€m M, Johannesson L, Bokstro
€m H, Kvarnstro
€m N, Mo
€lne J, DahmBr€
annstro
K€
ahler P, et al. Live birth after uterus transplantation. Lancet 2015;385:
607–16.
Sieunarine K, Zakaria F, Boyle D, Corless D, Del Priore G, Smith J. Possibilities for fertility restoration: A new surgical technique. Int Surg 2005;90:
249–56.
€m M. Successful uterine transRacho El-Akouri R, Kurlberg G, Br€annstro
plantation in the mouse: Pregnancy and postnatal development of
offspring. Hum Reprod 2003;18:2018–23.
McCulloch P, Altman DG, Campbell WB, Flum DR, Glasziou P, Marshall JC,
et al. No surgical innovation without evaluation: The IDEAL recommendations. Lancet 2009;374:1105–12.

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

177.

178.
179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.
186.

187.

€m M. Pregnancy after synWranning CA, Akhi SN, Diaz-Garcia C, Br€annstro
geneic uterus transplantation and spontaneous mating in the rat. Hum Reprod 2011;26:553–8.
€m M. First report on
Diaz Garcia C, Akhi SN, Wallin A, Pellicer A, Br€annstro
fertility after allogeneic uterus transplantation. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
2010;89:1491–4.
€m M. Pregnancy
Diaz-Garcia C, Johannesson L, Shao R, Bilig H, Br€annstro
after allogeneic uterus transplantation in the rat: Perinatal outcome and
growth trajectory. Fertil Steril 2014;102:1545–52.
Wranning CA, Marcickiewicz J, Enskog A, Dahm-Kahler P, Hanafy A,
€m M. Fertility after autologous ovine uterine-tubal-ovarian transBr€annstro
plantation by vascular anastomosis to the external iliac vessels. Hum Reprod 2010;25:1973–9.
Ramirez ER, Ramirez-Nessetti DK, Nessetti MB, Khatamee M, Wolfson MR,
Shaffer TH, et al. Pregnancy and outcome of uterine allotransplantation
and assisted reproduction in sheep. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2011;18:
238–45.
Mihara M, Kisu I, Hara H, Iida T, Araki J, Shim T, et al. Uterine autotransplantation in cynomolgus macaques: The ﬁrst case of pregnancy and delivery. Hum Reprod 2012;27:2332–40.
€m M, Johannesson L, Dahm-K€ahler P, Enskog A, Mo
€lne J,
Br€annstro
€m N, et al. The ﬁrst clinical uterus transplantation trial: A six
Kvarnstro
months report. Fertil Steril 2014;101:1228–36.
€m N, J€arvholm S, Johannesson L, Dahm-K€ahler P, Olausson M,
Kvarnstro
€m M. Live uterus donors of the initial observational study of
Br€annstro
uterus transplantation—psychological and medical follow-up until 1 year
after surgery in the 9 cases. Transplantation 2017;101:664–70.
€m M, Bokstro
€m M, Dahm-K€ahler P, Diaz-Garcia C, Ekberg J,
Br€annstro
Enskog A, et al. One uterus bridging three generations: First live birth
after mother-to-daughter uterus transplantation. Fertil Steril 2016;107:
261–6.
Testa G, Koon EC, Johannesson L, McKenna GJ, Anthony T, Klintmalm GB,
et al. Living donor uterus transplantation: A single center’s observations
and lessons learned from early setbacks to technical success. Am J Transplant 2017;17:2901–10.
Soares JM, Ejzenberg D, Andraus W, D'Albuquerque LAC, Baracat EC. First
Latin uterine transplantation: We can do it! Clinics (Sao Paolo) 2016;71:
627–8.
Donnez J, Dolmans MM. Fertility preservation in women. N Engl J Med
2018;378:400–1.
Jadoul P, Dolmans MM, Donnez J. Fertility preservation in girls during childhood: is it feasible, efﬁcient and safe and to whom should it be proposed?
Hum Reprod Update 2010;16:617–30.
Wallace WH, Anderson RA, Irvine DS. Fertility preservation for young patients with cancer: who is at risk and what can be offered? Lancet Oncol
2005;6:922.
Wallace WH, Kelsey TW, Anderson RA. Fertility preservation in prepubertal girls with cancer: the role of ovarian tissue cryopreservation. Fertil
Steril 2016;105:6–12.
Kitajima M, Dolmans MM, Donnez O, Masuzaki H, Soares M, Donnez J.
Enhanced follicular recruitment and atresia in cortex derived from ovaries
with endometriomas. Fertil Steril 2014;101:1031–7.
Rienzi L, Gracia C, Maggiulli R, LaBarbera AR, Kaser DJ, Ubaldi FM, et al.
Oocyte, embryo and blastocyst cryopreservation in ART: systematic review
and meta-analysis comparing slow-freezing versus vitriﬁcation to produce
evidence for the development of global guidance. Hum Reprod Update
2017;23:139–55.
Cobo A, García-Velasco JA, Coello A, Domingo J, Pellicer A, Remohí J.
Oocyte vitriﬁcation as an efﬁcient option for elective fertility preservation.
Fertil Steril 2016;105:755–64.
Silber S. Human ovarian tissue vitriﬁcation. Methods Mol Biol 2017;1568:
177–94.
Donnez J, Dolmans MM. Ovarian cortex transplantation: 60 reported live
births brings the success and worldwide expansion of the technique toward routine clinical practice. J Assist Reprod Genet 2015;32:1167–70.
Meirow D, Ra’anani H, Shapira M, Brenghausen M, Derech Chaim S, et al.
Transplantations of frozen-thawed ovarian tissue demonstrate high

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
313
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

194.

195.

196.
197.
198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

205.
206.
207.

reproductive performance and the need to revise restrictive criteria. Fertil
Steril 2016;106:467–74.
Jensen AK, Macklon KT, Fedder J, Ernst E, Humaidan P, Andersen CY. 86 successful births and 9 ongoing pregnancies worldwide in women transplanted
with frozen-thawed ovarian tissue: focus on birth and perinatal outcome in
40 of these children. J Assist Reprod Genet 2017;34:325–36.
Donnez J, Dolmans MM, Diaz C, Pellicer A. Ovarian cortex transplantation:
time to move on from experimental studies to open clinical application. Fertil Steril 2015;104:1097–8.
€ssel J,
van der Ven H, Liebenthron J, Beckmann M, Toth B, Korell M, Kru
et al. FertiPROTEKT network. Ninety-ﬁve orthotopic transplantations in
74 women of ovarian tissue after cytotoxic treatment in a fertility preservation network: tissue activity, pregnancy and delivery rates. Hum Reprod
2016;31:2031–41.
Diaz-Garcia C, Domingo J, Garcia-Velasco JA, Herraiz S, Mirabet V, Iniesta I,
et al. Oocyte vitriﬁcation versus ovarian cortex transplantation in fertility
preservation for adult women undergoing gonadotoxic treatments: a prospective cohort study. Fertil Steril 2018;109:478–85.
Silber SJ, Lenahan KM, Levine DJ, Pineda JA, Gorman KS, Friez MJ, et al.
Ovarian transplantation between monozygotic twins discordant for premature ovarian failure. N Engl J Med 2005;353:58–63.
Donnez J, Dolmans MM, Squifﬂet J, Kerbrat G, Jadoul P. Live birth after allografting of ovarian cortex between monozygotic twins with Turner syndrome (45,XO/46,XX mosaicism) and discordant ovarian function. Fertil
Steril 2011;96:1407–11.
Donnez J, Dolmans MM, Pirard C, van Langendonckt A, Demylle D,
Jadoul P, Squifﬂet J. Allograft of ovarian cortex between two genetically
nonidentical sisters: case report. Hum Reprod 2007;22:2653–9.
Donnez J, Squifﬂet J, Pirard C, Demylle D, Delbaere A, Armenio L, et al. Live
birth after allografting of ovarian cortex between genetically nonidentical
sisters. Hum Reprod 2011;26:1384–8.
Tjio HJ, Levan A. The chromosome number of man. Hereditas 1956;42:1–6.
Aittomaki K. The genetics of XX gonadal dysgenesis. Am J Hum Genet
1994;54:844.
Aittomaki K, Dieguez Luccena JL, Pakarinen P, Sistonen P, Tapanainen J,
Gromoll J, et al. Mutation in the follicle-stimulating hormone receptor
gene causes hereditary hypergonadotropic ovarian failure. Cell 1995;82:
959.
Qin Y, Jiao X, Simpson JL, Chen ZJ. Genetics of primary ovarian insufﬁciency: new developments in etiology and opportunities. Hum Reprod Update 2015;21:787–808.
Qin Y, Simpson JL, Cjen ZJ. Genetics of premature ovarian failure: new developments in etiology opportunity. In: Vogt P, editor. Genetics of Human
Infertility. Monographs in Human Genetics, Vol. 21. Basel: Karger; 2017:
17–39 (doi:10.1159/000477276).
Yang P, Luan X, Peng Y, Chen T, Su S, Zhang C, et al. Novel zona pellucida
gene variants identiﬁed in patients with oocyte anomalies. Fertil Steril
2017;107:1364–9.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology. 2014. Assisted reproductive technology fertility clinic success rates report. Atlanta,
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services; 2016.
Chang J, Boulet SL, Jeng G, Flowers L, Kissin DM. Outcomes of in vitro fertilization with preimplantation genetic diagnosis: an analysis of the Unites
States Assisted Reproductive Technology Surveillance Data 2011–2012.
Fertil Steril 2016;105:394–400.
Harton GL, Munn
e S, Surrey M, Grifo J, Kaplan B, Mcculloh DH, et al.
Diminished effect of maternal age on implantation after preimplantation
genetic diagnosis with array comparative genomic hybridization. Fertil
Steril 2013;100:1695–703.
Simpson J, Christakos AC. Hereditary factors in obstetrics and gynecology.
Obstet Gynecol Surv 1969;24:580.
Simpson JL, Elias S, Malinak LR. VC Buttram. Heritable aspects of endometriosis: I. Genetic studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1980;137:327–31.
Chen ZJ, Zhao H, He L, Shi Y, Qin Y, Shi Y, Li Z, et al. Genome-wide association study identiﬁes susceptibility loci for polycystic ovary syndrome on
chromosome 2p16.3, 2p21 and 9q33.3. Nat Genet 2011;43:55–9.

208.

209.

210.
211.
212.

213.

214.

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

Shi Y, Zhao H, Shi Y, Cao Y, Yang D, Li Z, et al. Genome-wide association
study idenﬁﬁes eight new risk loci for polycystic ovary syndrome. Nat Genet
2012;44:1020–5.
Petrozza JC, Gray MR, Davis AJ, Reindollar RH. Congenital absence of the
uterus and vagina is not commonly transmitted as a dominant genetic trait:
outcomes of surrogate pregnancies. Fertil Steril 1997;67:387–9.
Campbell P, Gallagher R, Dennis C, eds. The human genome. Nature 2001;
47:813–957.
Dhand R. Human genome collection. Nature 2006;409(suppl 1):7–17.
Feichtinger M, Wallner E, Hartmann B, Reiner A, Philipp T. Transcervical embryoscopic and cytogenetic ﬁndings reveal distinctive differences in primary
and secondary recurrent pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 2017;107:144–9.
Penketh R, McLaren A. Prospects for prenatal diagnosis during
preimplantation human development. Baillieres Clin Obstet Gynaecol
1987;1:747–64.
Kerem B, Rommens JM, Buchanan JA, Markiewicz D, Cox TK,
Chakravarti A, et al. Identiﬁcation of the cystic ﬁbrosis gene: genetic analysis. Science 1989;245(4922):1073–80.
Verlinsky Y, Ginsberg N, Lifchez A, Valle J, Moise J, Strom CM. Analysis of
the ﬁrst polar body: preconception genetic diagnosis. Hum Reprod 1990;5:
826–9.
 J, et al.
Veiga A, Sandalinas M, Benkhalifa M, Boada M, Carrera M, Santalo
Laser blastocyst biopsy for preimplantation diagnosis in the human. Zygote
1997;5:351–4.
Handyside AH, Kontogianni EH, Hardy K, Winston RM. Pregnancies from
biopsied human preimplantation embryos sexed by Y-speciﬁc DNA ampliﬁcation. Nature 1990;344(6268):768–70.
Holding C, Monk M. Diagnosis of beta-thalassaemia by DNA ampliﬁcation
in single blastomeres from mouse preimplantation embryos. Lancet 1989;
2(8662):532–5.
Coutelle C, Williams C, Handyside A, Hardy K, Winston R, Williamson R.
Genetic analysis of DNA from single human oocytes: a model for preimplantation diagnosis of cystic ﬁbrosis. BMJ 1989;299(6690):22–4.
Handyside AH, Lesko JG, Tarín JJ, Winston RML, Hughes MR. Birth of a
normal girl after in vitro fertilization and preimplantation diagnostic testing
for cystic ﬁbrosis. N Engl J Med 1992;327:905–9.
Ao A, Wells D, Handyside AH, Winston RM, Delhanty JD. Preimplantation
genetic diagnosis of inherited cancer: familial adenomatous polyposis coli.
J Assist Reprod Genet 1998;15:140–4.
Fiorentino F, Biricik A, Nuccitelli A, De Palma R, Kahraman S, Iacobelli M,
et al. Strategies and clinical outcome of 250 cycles of preimplantation genetic diagnosis for single gene disorders. Hum Reprod 2006;21:670–84.
Verlinsky Y, Rechitsky S, Schoolcraft W, Strom C, Kuliev A. Preimplantation
diagnosis for Fanconi anemia combined with HLA matching. JAMA 2001;
285:3130–3.
Kahraman S, Beyazyurek C, Yesilipek MA, Ozturk G, Ertem M, Anak S,
et al. Successful haematopoietic stem cell transplantation in 44 children
from healthy siblings conceived after preimplantation HLA matching. Reprod Biomed Online 2014;29:340–51.
Renwick PJ, Trussler J, Ostad-Saffari E, Fassihi H, Black C, Braude P, et al.
Proof of principle and ﬁrst cases using preimplantation genetic haplotyping—a paradigm shift for embryo diagnosis. Reprod Biomed Online
2006;13:110–9.
Handyside AH, Harton GL, Mariani B, Thornhill AR, Affara N, Shaw M-A,
et al. Karyomapping: a universal method for genome wide analysis of genetic disease based on mapping crossovers between parental haplotypes. J
Med Genet 2010;47:651–8.
Natesan SA, Bladon AJ, Coskun S, Qubbaj W, Prates R, Munne S, et al.
Genome-wide karyomapping accurately identiﬁes the inheritance of
single-gene defects in human preimplantation embryos in vitro. Genet
Med 2014;16:838–45.
Yan L, Huang L, Xu L, Huang J, Ma F, Zhu X, et al. Live births after simultaneous avoidance of monogenic diseases and chromosome abnormality by
next-generation sequencing with linkage analyses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2015;112:15964–9.
Boulad F, Mansilla-Soto J, Cabriolu A, Riviere I, Sadelain M. Gene therapy
and genome editing. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 2018;32:329–42.

314
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
230.

231.

232.

233.

234.

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

240.

241.

242.

243.

244.

245.

246.
247.

Ma H, Marti-Gutierrez N, Park S-W, Wu J, Lee Y, Suzuki K, et al. Correction
of a pathogenic gene mutation in human embryos. Nature 2017;
548(7668):413–9.
Munn
e S, Lee A, Rosenwaks Z, Grifo J, Cohen J. diagnosis of major chromosome aneuploidies in human preimplantation embryos. Human Reprod
1993;8:2185–91.
Yang Z, Liu J, Collins GS, Salem SA, Liu X, Lyle SS, et al. Selection of single
blastocysts for fresh transfer via standard morphology assessment alone
and with array CGH for good prognosis IVF patients: results from a randomized pilot study. Mol Cytogenet 2012;5:24.
Scott RT, Upham KM, Forman EJ, Hong KH, Scott KL, Taylor D, et al. Blastocyst biopsy with comprehensive chromosome screening and fresh embryo transfer signiﬁcantly increases in vitro fertilization implantation and
delivery rates: a randomized controlled trial. Fertil Steril 2013;100:697–
703.
Forman EJ, Hong KH, Ferry KM, Tao X, Taylor D, Levy B, et al. In vitro fertilization with single euploid blastocyst transfer: a randomized controlled
trial. Fertil Steril 2013;100:100–7.
Rubio C, Bellver J, Rodrigoa L, Castillon G, Guillen A, Vidal C, et al. In vitro
fertilization with preimplantation genetic diagnosis for aneuploidies in
advanced maternal age: a randomized controlled study. Fertil Steril
2017;107:1122-9.
Munn
e S, Kaplan B, Frattarelli J, Gysler M, Child T, Nakhuda G, et al. Global
multicenter randomized controlled trial comparing single embryo transfer
with embryo selection by preimplantation genetic screening using nextgeneration sequencing versus morphologic assessment. Fertil Steril 2017;
108:e19(O-43).
Ata B, Kaplan B, Danzer H, Glassner M, Opsahl M, Tan SL, Munne S. Array
CGH analysis shows that aneuploidy is not related with the number of embryos generated. Reprod Biomed Online 2012;24:614–20.
Harton G, Munn
e S, Surrey M, Grifo J, Kaplan B, Grifﬁn DK, Wells D. PGD
Practitioners Group. Diminished effect of maternal age on implantation after preimplantation genetic diagnosis with array comparative genomic hybridization. Fertil Steril 2013;100:1695–703.
Gianaroli L, Magli MC, Ferraretti AP, Fiorentino A, Garrisi J, Munne S. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis increases the implantation rate in human
in vitro fertilization by avoiding the transfer of chromosomally abnormal
embryos. Fertil Steril 1997;68:1128–31.
Mastenbroek S, Twisk M, van Echten-Arends J, Sikkema-Raddatz B,
Korevaar JC, Verhoeve HR, et al. Preimplantation genetic screening in
women of advanced maternal age. N Engl J Med 2007;357:9–17.
Scott RT Jr, Upham KM, Forman EJ, Zhao T, Treff NR. Cleavage stage biopsy
signiﬁcantly impairs human embryonic implantation potential while blastocyst biopsy does not: a randomized and paired clinical trial. Fertil Steril
2013;100:697–703.
Guti
errez-Mateo C, Colls P, Sanchez-García J, Escudero T, Prates R,
Wells D, Munn
e S. Validation of microarray comparative genomic hybridization for comprehensive chromosome analysis of embryos. Fertil Steril
2011;95:953–8.
Treff NR, Su J, Tao X, Levy B, Scott RT. Accurate single cell 24 chromosome
aneuploidy screening using whole genome ampliﬁcation and single nucleotide polymorphism microarrays. Fertil Steril 2010;94:2017–21.
Wells D, Kaur K, Rico A, Grifo J, Anderson S, Sherlock J, et al. Clinical utilization of a rapid low-pass whole-genome sequencing technique for the
diagnosis of aneuploidy in human embryos prior to implantation. J Med
Genet 2014;51:553–62.
Munn
e S, Blazek J, Large M, Martinez-Ortiz PA, Nisson H, Liu E, et al.
Detailed investigation into the cytogenetic constitution and pregnancy
outcome of replacing mosaic blastocysts detected by high resolution
next generation sequencing. Fertil Steril 2017;107:1113–9.
Greco E, Minasi MG, Fiorentino F. Healthy babies after intrauterine transfer
of mosaic aneuploid blastocysts. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2089–90.
Friedenthal J, Maxwell SM, Munne S, Kramer Y, McCulloh DH, McCaffrey
C, Grifo JA. Next-generation sequencing for preimplantation genetic
screening improves pregnancy outcomes compared to array comparative
genomic hybridization in single thawed euploid embryo transfer cycles.
Fertil Steril. 2018;109:627-32.

248.
249.

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

255.

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

261.
262.

263.

264.

265.
266.
267.
268.

269.

270.
271.

Porteus MH. Toward a new era in medicine: therapeutic genome editing.
Genome Biol 2015;16:286.
Vassena R, Heindryckx B, Peco R, Pennings G, Raya A, Sermon K, et al. Genome
engineering through CRISPR/Cas9 technology in the human germline and
pluripotent stem cells. Hum Reprod Update 2016;22:411–9.
Vassena R, Eguizabal C, Heindryckx B, Sermon K, Simon C, van Pelt AM,
et al. ESHRE Stem Cells Special Interest Group. Stem cells in reproductive
medicine: ready for the patient? Hum Reprod 2015;30:2014–21.
Reddy P, Ocampo A, Suzuki K, Luo J, Bacman SR, Williams SL, et al. Selective elimination of mitochondrial mutations in the germline by genome editing. Cell 2015;161:459–69.
Midic U, Hung PH, Vincent KA, Goheen B, Schupp PG, Chen DD, et al.
Quantitative assessment of timing, efﬁciency, speciﬁcity and genetic mosaicism of CRISPR/Cas9–mediated gene editing of hemoglobin beta gene in
rhesus monkey embryos. Hum Mol Genet 2017;26:2678–89.
Shao Y, Guan Y, Wang L, Qiu Z, Liu M, Chen Y, et al. CRISPR/Cas–mediated
genome editing in the rat via direct injection of one-cell embryos. Nat Protoc 2014;9:2493–512.
Gil MA, Martinez CA, Nohalez A, Parrilla I, Roca J, Wu J, et al. Developmental competence of porcine genome-edited zygotes. Mol Reprod Dev
2017;84:814–21.
Tu Z, Yang W, Yan S, Yin A, Gao J, Liu X. Promoting Cas9 degradation reduces mosaic mutations in nonhuman primate embryos. Sci Rep 2017;7:
42081.
Liang P, Xu Y, Zhang X, Ding C, Huang R, Zhang Z, et al. CRISPR/Cas9–
mediated gene editing in human tripronuclear zygotes. Protein Cell
2015;6:363–72.
Kang X, He W, Huang Y, Yu Q, Chen Y, Gao X, et al. Introducing precise
genetic modiﬁcations into human 3PN embryos by CRISPR/Cas–mediated
genome editing. J Assist Reprod Genet 2016;33:581–8.
Tang L, Zeng Y, Du H, Gong M, Peng J, Zhang B, et al. CRISPR/Cas9–mediated gene editing in human zygotes using Cas9 protein. Mol Genet Genomics 2017;292:525–33.
Ma H, Marti-Gutierrez N, Park S-W, Wu J, Lee Y, Suzuki K, et al.
Correction of a pathogenic gene mutation in human embryos. Nature
2017;548:413–9.
Fogarty NME, McCarthy A, Snijders KE, Powell BE, Kubikova N, Blakeley P,
et al. Genome editing reveals a role for OCT4 in human embryogenesis.
Nature 2017;550(7674):67–73.
Kleinsmith LJ, Pierce GB Jr. Multipotentiality of single embryonal carcinoma
cells. Cancer Res 1964;24:1544–51.
Trounson AO, Mohr LR, Wood C, Leeton JF. Effect of delayed insemination
on in vitro fertilization, culture and transfer of human embryos. J Reprod
Fertil 1982;64:285–94.
Thomson JA, Itskovitz-Eldor J, Shapiro SS, Waknitz MA, Swiergiel JJ,
Marshall VS, Jones JM. Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts. Science 1998;282:1145–7.
Reubinoff BE, Pera MF, Fong CY, Trounson A, Bongso A. Embryonic stem
cell lines from human blastocysts: somatic differentiation in vitro. Nat Biotechnol 2000;18:399–404.
Bongso A, Fong CY, Ng SC, Ratnam S. Isolation and culture of inner cell
mass cells from human blastocysts. Hum Reprod 1994;9:2110–7.
Trounson A. A rapidly evolving revolution in stem cell biology and medicine. Reprod Biol Med Online 2013;26:756–64.
Barbaric I, Harrison NJ. Rediscovering pluripotency: from teratocarcinomas
to embryonic stem cells. Int J Dev Biol 2012;56:197–206.
Shamblott MJ, Axelman J, Wang S, Bugg EM, Littleﬁeld JW, Donovan PJ,
et al. Derivation of pluripotent stem cells from cultured human primordial
germ cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:13726–31.
Gafni O, Weinberger L, Mansour AA, Manor YS, Chomsky E, Ben-Yosef D,
et al. Derivation of novel human ground state naïve pluripotent stem cells.
Nature 2013;504:282–6.
Steptoe PC, Edwards RG, Purdy JM. Human blastocysts grown in culture.
Nature 1971;229:132–3.
Jones GM, Trounson AO, Gardner DK, Kausche A, Lolatgis N, Wood C.
Evolution of a culture protocol for successful blastocyst development and
pregnancy. Hum Reprod 1998;13:169–77.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
315
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
272.
273.
274.
275.
276.

277.

278.

279.
280.

281.

282.
283.

284.
285.

286.
287.

288.

289.
290.
291.

292.

293.

294.

295.

Trounson A. The production and directed differentiation of human embryonic stem cells. Endocr Rev 2006;27:208–19.
Lomax GP, Trounson AO. Correcting misperceptions about cryopreserved
embryos and stem cell research. Nat Biotechnol 2013;31:288–90.
Abdelalim EM, Emara MM, Kolatkar PR. The SOX transcription factors as
key players in pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cells Dev 2014;23:2687–99.
Trounson A, DeWitt ND. Pluripotent stem cells progressing to the clinic. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol 2016;17:194–200.
Zhang J, Li H, Trounson A, Wu JC, Nioi P. Combining hiPSCs and human
genetics: major applications in drug development. Cell Stem Cell 2017;
21:161–5.
Yamaguchi T, Sato H, Kato-Itoh M, Goto T, Hara H, Sanbo M, et al. Interspecies organogenesis generates autologous functional islets. Nature
2017;542:191–6.
Aach J, Lunshof J, Iyer E, Church GM. Addressing the ethical issues raised
by synthetic human entities with embryo-like features. eLIFE. Published online March 21, 2017. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.20674.
Zinaman MJ, Clegg ED, Brown CC, O’Connor J, Selevan SG. Estimates of
human fertility and pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 1996;65:503–9.
Wilcox AJ, Weinberg CR, O'Connor JF, Baird DD, Schlatterer JP,
Canﬁeld RE, et al. Incidence of early loss of pregnancy. N Engl J Med
1988;319:189–94.
Sullivan EA, Zegers-Hochschild F, Mansour R, Ishihara O, de Mouzon J,
Nygren KG, et al. International Committee for Monitoring Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ICMART) world report: assisted reproductive technology 2004. Hum Reprod 2013;28:1375–90.
Murphy CR. Uterine receptivity and the plasma membrane transformation.
Cell Res 2004;14:259–67.
~onero A,
Garrido-Gomez T, Dominguez F, Lopez JA, Camafeita E, Quin
Martinez-Conejero JA, et al. Modeling human endometrial decidualization
from the interaction between proteome and secretome. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2011;96:706–16.
Noyes RW, Hertig AT, Rock J. Dating the endometrial biopsy. Fertil Steril
1950;1:3–25.
Coutifaris C, Myers ER, Guzick DS, Diamond MP, Carson SA, Legro RS,
et al. Histological dating of timed endometrial biopsy tissue is not related
to fertility status. Fertil Steril 2004;82:1264–72.
Hertig AT, Rock J, Adams EC. A description of 34 human ova within the ﬁrst
17 days of development. Am J Anat 1956;98:435–93.
Kemeter P, Feichtinger W. Transvaginal oocyte retrieval using a transvaginal sector scan probe combined with an automated puncture device. Hum
Reprod 1986;1:21–4.
Navot D, Scott RT, Droesch K, Veeck LL, Liu H-C, Rosenwaks Z. The window
of embryo transfer and the efﬁciency of human conception in vitro. Fertil
Steril 1991;55:114–8.
Wilcox AJ, Baird DD, Weinberg CR. Time of implantation of the conceptus
and loss of pregnancy. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1796–9.
Barker DJ. The fetal and infant origins of adult disease. Br Med J 1990;301:
1111.
Ponnampalam AP, Weston GC, Trajstman AC, Susil B, Rogers PA. Molecular classiﬁcation of human endometrial cycle stages by transcriptional
proﬁling. Mol Hum Reprod 2004;10:879–93.
Talbi S, Hamilton A, Vo K, Tulac S, Overgaard MT, Dosiou C, et al. Molecular phenotyping of human endometrium distinguishes menstrual cycle
phases and underlying biological processes in normo-ovulatory women.
Endocrinology 2006;147:1097–121.
Riesewijk A, Martín J, van Os R, Horcajadas JA, Polman J, Pellicer A,
Simon C. Gene expression proﬁling of human endometrial receptivity on
days LHþ2 versus LHþ7 by microarray technology. Mol Hum Reprod
2003;9:253–64.
Díaz-Gimeno P, Horcajadas JA, Martínez-Conejero JA, Esteban FJ, Alama P,
Pellicer A, Simon C. A genomic diagnostic tool for human endometrial
receptivity based on the transcriptomic signature. Fertil Steril 2011;95:
50–60.
€m M, Johannesson L, Bokstro
€m H, Kvarnstro
€m N, Mo
€lne J, DahmBr€
annstro
Kahler P, et al. Livebirth after uterus transplantation. Lancet 2015;385:
607–16.

296.

297.

298.

299.
300.

301.

302.

303.

304.

305.

306.

307.

308.

309.

310.

311.

312.

313.

314.

~er F, Vilella F, Valbuena D, Martinez-Blanch JF, JimenezMoreno I, Codon
Almazan J, et al. Evidence that the endometrial microbiota has an effect
on implantation success or failure. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2016;215:684–
703.
 I, Arbona C, Raga F, Ferro J, et al.
Santamaría X, Cabanillas S, Cervello
Autologous cell therapy with CD133þ bone marrow–derived stem cells
for refractory Asherman’s syndrome and endometrial atrophy: a pilot
cohort study. Hum Reprod 2016;31:1087–96.
~onero A, Diaz-Gimeno P,
Garrido-Gomez T, Dominguez F, Quin
Kapidzic M, Gormley M, et al. Defective decidualization during and after
severe preeclampsia reveals a possible maternal contribution to the etiology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2017;114:767–77.
Tulandi T, Vilos G. A comparison between laser surgery and electrosurgery
for bilateral hydrosalpinx: a 2-year follow-up. Fertil Steril 1985;44:846–8.
Milingos SD, Kallipolitis GK, Loutradis DC, Liapi AG, Hassan EA,
Mavrommatis CG, et al. Laparoscopic treatment of hydrosalpinx: factors affecting pregnancy rate. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparos 2000;7:
355–61.
Mossa B, Patella A, Ebano V, Paciﬁci E, Mossa S, Marziani R. Microsurgery versus laparoscopy in distal tubal obstruction hysterosalpingographically or laparoscopically investigated. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol
2004;32:169–71.
€m U, Thorburn J, Janson P,
Strandell A, Lindhard A, Waldenstro
Hamberger L. Hydrosalpinx and IVF outcome: a prospective, randomized
multicentre trial in Scandinavia on salpingectomy prior to IVF. Hum Reprod
1999;14:2762–9.
Dechaud H, Daures JP, Arnal F, Humeau C, Hedon B. Does previous salpingectomy improve implantation and pregnancy rates in patients with severe
tubal factor infertility who are undergoing in vitro fertilization? A pilot prospective randomized study. Fertil Steril 1998;69:1020–5.
Kontoravdis A, Makrakis E, Pantos K, Botsis D, Deligeoroglou E, Creatsas G.
Proximal tubal occlusion and salpingectomy result in similar improvement
in in vitro fertilization outcome in patients with hydrosalpinx. Fertil Steril
2006;86:1642–9.
Johnson N, van Voorst S, Sowter MC, Strandell A, Mol BWJ. Surgical treatment for tubal disease in women due to undergo in vitro fertilisation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;1:CD002125.
Grynnerup AGA, Lindhard A, Sørensen S. Anti-m€
ullerian hormone levels in
salpingectomized compared with nonsalpingectomized women with tubal
factor infertility and women with unexplained infertility. Acta Obstet Gyneol Scand 2013;92:1297–303.
Almog B, Wagman I, Bibi G, Raz Y, Azem F, Groutz A, et al. Effects of salpingectomy on ovarian response in controlled ovarian stimulation for invitro fertilization: a reappraisal. Fertil Steril 2011;95:2474–6.
Kontoravdis A, Makrakis E, Pantos K, Botsis D, Deligeoroglou E, Creatsas G.
Proximal tubal occlusion and salpingectomy result in similar improvement
in in vitro fertilization outcome in patients with hydrosalpinx. Fertil Steril
2006;86:1642–9.
Tsiami A, Chaimani A, Mavridis D, Siskou M, Assimakopoulos E,
Sotiriadis A. Surgical treatment for hydrosalpinx prior to in vitro fertilization
embryo transfer: a network meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
2016;48:434–45.
Dreyer K, Lier M, Emanuel M, Twisk J, Mol B, Schats R, et al. Hysteroscopic
proximal tubal occlusion versus laparoscopic salpingectomy as a treatment
for hydrosalpinges prior to IVF or ICSI: an RCT. Hum Reprod 2016;31:
2005–16.
Arora P, Arora R, Cahill D. Essure for management of hydrosalpinx prior to
in vitro fertilisation—a systematic review and pooled analysis. BJOG 2014;
121:527–36.
Yunker AC, Ritch JM, Robinson EF, Golish CT. Incidence and risk factors for
chronic pelvic pain after hysteroscopic sterilization. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2015;22:390–4.
Cohen A, Almog B, Tulandi T. Hydrosalpinx sclerotherapy before in vitro
fertilization: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. Published online December 14, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jmig.2017.12.004.
Carson R. Silent spring. New York: Fawcett Press; 1962.

316
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
315.
316.

317.
318.

319.
320.

321.

322.
323.

324.

325.

326.
327.

328.

329.
330.

331.
332.

333.
334.

335.

336.

337.

Colborn T, Dumanoski D, Meyers JP. Our stolen future. New York: Dutton;
1996.
Gore AC, Chappell VA, Fenton SE, Flaws JA, Nadal A, Prins GS, et al. EDC2: The Endocrine Society’s second scientiﬁc statement on endocrinedisrupting chemicals. Endocr Rev 2015;36:E1–150.
Birnbaum LS. When environmental chemicals act like uncontrolled medicine. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2013;24:321–3.
Crain DA, Janssen SJ, Edwards TM, Heindel J, Ho SM, Hunt P, et al. Female
reproductive disorders: the roles of endocrine-disrupting compounds and
developmental timing. Fertil Steril 2008;90:911–40.
Woodruff TJ, Janssen SJ, Guillette LJ, Giudice LC, editors. Environmental impacts on reproductive health and fertility. London: Cambridge Press; 2009.
Vabre P, Gatimel N, Moreau J, Gayrard V, Picard-Hagen N, Parinaud J, et al.
Environmental pollutants, a possible etiology for premature ovarian insufﬁciency: a narrative review of animal and human data. Environ Health
2017;16:37–45.
Skakkebaek NE, Raipert-DeMeyts E, Buk Louis GM, Toppari J,
Andersson ApM, Eisenberg ML, et al. Male reproductive disorders and
fertility trends: inﬂuences of environment and genetic susceptibility. Physiol
Rev 2016;96:55–97.
Sharara FI, Seifer DB, Flaws JA. Environmental toxicants and female reproduction. Fertil Steril 1998;70:613–22.
Karwacka A, Zamkowska D, Radwan M, Jurewicz J. Exposure to modern,
widespread environmental endocrine disrupting chemicals and their effect
on the reproductive potential of women: an overview of current epidemiological evidence. Hum Fertil 2017;31:1–24.
Younglai EV, Holloway AC, Foster WG. Environmental and occupational
factors affecting fertility and IVF success. Hum Reprod Update 2005;11:
43–57.
n L, Souter
Chiu YH, Williams PL, Gillman MW, Gaskins AJ, Mínguez-Alarco
I, et al. Association between pesticide residue intake from consumption of
fruits and vegetables and pregnancy outcomes among women undergoing
infertility treatment with assisted reproductive technology. JAMA Intern
Med 2018;178:17-26.
Carr
e J, Gatimel N, Moreau J, Parinaud J, Leandri R. Does air pollution play a
role in infertility? A systematic review. Environ Health 2017;16:82–98.
Woodruff TJ, Sutton P. The Navigation Guide systematic review methodology: a rigorous and transparent method for translating environmental
health science into better health outcomes. Environ Health Perspect
2014;122:1007–14.
Giudice LC, Swan SH, Myers JP, Carlson A. Vallombrosa consensus statement on environmental contaminants and human fertility compromise.
Semin Reprod Med 2006;24:178–89.
Mitchell GW, Rogers J. The inﬂuence of weight reduction on amenorrhoea
in obese women. N Engl J Med 1953;249:835–7.
Hartz AJ, Barboriak PN, Wong A, Katayama KP, Rimm AA. The association
of obesity with infertility and related menstrual abnormalities in women. Int
J Obes 1979;3:57–73.
Lake JK, Power C, Cole TJ. Women’s reproductive health—the role of body
mass index in early and adult life. Int J Obes 1997;21:432–8.
Rich-Edwards JA, Goldman MB, Willett WC, Hunter DJ, Stampfer MJ,
Colditz GA, Manson JE. Adolescent body mass index and infertility caused
by ovulatory disorder. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;171:171–7.
Zain MM, Norman RJ. Impact of obesity on female fertility and fertility treatment. Womens Health 2008;4:183–94.
Gortmaker SL, Swinburn B, Levy D, Carter R, Mabry PL, Finegood D, et al.
Changing the future of obesity: science, policy and action. Lancet 2011;
378:838–47.
Moran LJ, Miso ML, Wild RA, Norman RJ. Impaired glucose tolerance, type 2
diabetes and metabolic syndrome in polycystic ovary syndrome: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Update 2010;16:347–63.
Godfrey KM, Reynolds RM, Prescott SL, Nyirenda M, Jaddoe VWV,
Eriksson JG, Broekman BFP. Inﬂuence of maternal obesity on the longterm health of offspring. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:53–64.
Campbell JM, Lane M, Owens JA, Bakos HW. Paternal obesity negatively
affects male fertility and assisted reproduction outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Biomed Online 2015;31:593–604.

338.

339.

340.

341.

342.

343.
344.

345.
346.

347.

348.

349.

350.

351.

352.

353.

354.

355.

356.

357.

Rittenberg V, Seshadri S, Sunkara SK, Sobaleva S, Oteng-Ntim E, ElToukhy T. Effect of body mass index on IVF treatment outcome: an updated
systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Biomed Online 2011;23:
421–39.
Wu LL, Russell DL, Wong SL, Chen M, Tsai TS, St John J, et al. Mitochondrial
dysfunction in oocytes of obese mothers: transmission to offspring and
reversal by pharmacological endoplasmic reticulum stress inhibitors. Development 2015;142:681–91.
Clark AM, Ledger W, Galletly C, Tomlinson L, Blaney F, Wang X,
Norman RJ. Weight loss results in signiﬁcant improvement in pregnancy
and ovulation rates in anovulatory obese women. Hum Reprod 1995;10:
2705–12.
Kiddy DS, Hamilton-Fairley D, Bush A, Short F, Anyaoku V, Reed MJ,
Franks S. Improvement in endocrine and ovarian function during dietary
treatment of obese women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Clin Endocrinol 1992;36:105–11.
Norman RJ. 2015 RANZCOG Arthur Wilson Memorial Oration ‘‘From little
things, big things grow: the importance of periconception medicine’’. Aust
NZ J Obstet Gynaecol 2015;55:535–40.
Lane M, Robker RL, Robertson SA. Parenting from before conception. Science 2014;345:756–60.
Harper J, Jackson E, Sermon K, Aitken RJ, Harbottle S, Mocanu E, et al. Adjuncts in the IVF laboratory: where is the evidence for ‘add-on’ interventions? Hum Reprod 2017;32:485–91.
Zeleznik AJ. The physiology of follicle selection. Reprod Biol Endocrinol
2004;2:31.
Vitt U, Hayashi M, Klein C, Hsueh A. Growth differentiation factor-9 stimulates proliferation but suppresses the follicle-stimulating hormoneinduced differentiation of cultured granulosa cells from small antral and
preovulatory rat follicles. Biol Reprod 2000;62:370–7.
Kawamura K, Cheng Y, Kawamura N, Takae S, Okada A, Kawagoe Y, et al.
Pre-ovulatory LH/hCG surge decreases C-type natriuretic peptide secretion
by ovarian granulosa cells to promote meiotic resumption of pre-ovulatory
oocytes. Hum Reprod 2011;26:3094–101.
Kawamura K, Kawamura N, Mulders SM, Sollewijn Gelpke MD, Hsueh AJ.
Ovarian brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) promotes the development of oocytes into preimplantation embryos. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2005;102:9206–11.
Kawamura K, Chen Y, Shu Y, Cheng Y, Qiao J, Behr B, et al. Promotion of
human early embryonic development and blastocyst outgrowth in vitro using autocrine/paracrine growth factors. PLoS One 2012;7:e49328.
Kawamura K, Cheng Y, Suzuki N, Deguchi M, Sato Y, Takae S, et al. Hippo
signaling disruption and Akt stimulation of ovarian follicles for infertility
treatment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:17474–9.
Zhai J, Yao G, Dong F, Bu Z, Cheng Y, Sato Y, et al. In vitro activation of
follicles and fresh tissue auto-transplantation in primary ovarian insufﬁciency patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:4405–12.
Feng Y, Zhu S, Antaris AL, Chen H, Xiao Y, Lu X, et al. Live imaging of follicle stimulating hormone receptors in gonads and bones using near
infrared II ﬂuorophore. Chem Sci 2017;8:3703–11.
Gleicher N, Barad DH. Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) supplementation in diminished ovarian reserve (DOR). Reprod Biol Endocrinol
2011;9:67.
Narkwichean A, Maalouf W, Campbell BK, Jayaprakasan K. Efﬁcacy of
dehydroepiandrosterone to improve ovarian response in women with
diminished ovarian reserve: a meta-analysis. Reprod Biol Endocrinol
2013;11:44.
Yeung T, Chai J, Li R, Lee V, Ho PC, Ng E. A double-blind randomised trial
on the effect of dehydroepiandrosterone on ovarian reserve markers,
ovarian response and number of oocytes in anticipated normal ovarian responders. BJOG 2016;123:1097–105.
Xiao S, Zhang J, Romero MM, Smith KN, Shea LD, Woodruff TK. In vitro follicle growth supports human oocyte meiotic maturation. Sci Rep 2015;5:
17323.
White YA, Woods DC, Takai Y, Ishihara O, Seki H, Tilly JL. Oocyte formation
by mitotically active germ cells puriﬁed from ovaries of reproductive-age
women. Nat Med 2012;18:413–21.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
317
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
358.
359.

360.

361.

362.

363.

364.

365.

366.

367.

368.
369.

370.

371.
372.

373.

374.

375.

376.

377.

378.
379.

Gosden RG. Programmes and prospects for ovotechnology. Reprod Biomed Online 2013;27:702–9.
Woods DC, Tilly JL. Autologous germline mitochondrial energy transfer
(AUGMENT) in human assisted reproduction. Semin Reprod Med 2015;
33:410–21.
Fakih MH, El Shmoury M, Szeptycki J, dela Cruz DB, Lux C, Verjee S, et al.
The AUGMENTSM treatment: physician reported outcomes of the initial
global patient experience. J Fertil In Vitro IVF World Reprod Med Genet
Stem Cell Biol 2015;3:45.
Boucret L, Bris C, Seegers V, Goudenege D, Desquiret-Dumas V, DominBernhard M, et al. Deep sequencing shows that oocytes are not prone to
accumulate mtDNA heteroplasmic mutations during ovarian ageing.
Hum Reprod 2017:1–9.
Laufer N, DeCherney AH, Haseltine FP, Polan ML, Mezer HC, Dlugi AM,
et al. The use of high-dose human menopausal gonadotropin in an
in vitro fertilization program. Fertil Steril 1983;40:734–41.
Laufer N, Grunfeld L, Garrisi J. In vitro fertilization. In: Seibel MM, editor.
Infertility a comprehensive text. New York: Appleton & Lange; 1990:
481–512.
Maheshwari A, Gibreel A, Bhattacharya S, Johnson NP. Dynamic tests of
ovarian reserve: a systematic review of diagnostic accuracy. Reprod Biomed
Online 2009;18:717–34.
Muasher SJ, Oehninger S, Simonetti S, Matta J, Ellis LM, Liu HC, et al. The
value of basal and/or stimulated serum gonadotropin levels in prediction of
stimulation response and in vitro fertilization outcome. Fertil Steril 1988;
50:298–307.
Licciardi FL, Liu HC, Rosenwaks Z. Day 3 estradiol serum concentrations
as prognosticators of ovarian stimulation response and pregnancy
outcome in patients undergoing in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 1995;
64:991–4.
Broekmans FJ, Kwee J, Hendriks DJ, Mol BW, Lambalk CB. A systematic review of tests predicting ovarian reserve and IVF outcome. Hum Reprod Update 2006;12:685–718.
Hackoloer BJ. Ultrasonic demonstration of follicular development. Lancet
1978;1:941.
Tarlatzis BC, Laufer N, Decherney AH. The use of ovarian ultrasonography
in monitoring ovulation induction. J In Vitro Fert Embryo Transf 1984;1:
226–32.
Lenz S, Lauritsen JG. Ultrasonically guided percutaneous aspiration of human follicles under local anesthesia: a new method of collecting oocytes
for in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 1982;38:673–7.
Syrop CH, Willhoite A, Van Voorhis BJ. Ovarian volume: a novel outcome
predictor for assisted reproduction. Fertil Steril 1995;64:1167–71.
Ruess ML, Kline J, Santos R, Levin B, Timor-Tritsch I. Age and the ovarian
follicle pool assessed with transvaginal ultrasonography. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:624–7.
Tomas C, Nuojua-Huttunen S, Martikainen H. Pretreatment transvaginal
ultrasound examination predicts ovarian responsiveness to gonadotrophins in in-vitro fertilization. Hum Reprod 1997;12:220–3.
Chang MY, Chiang CH, Hsieh TT, Soong YK, Hsu KH. Use of the antral follicle count to predict the outcome of assisted reproductive technologies.
Fertil Steril 1998;69:505–10.
Broekmans FJ, de Ziegler D, Howles CM, Gougeon A, Trew G, Olivennes F.
The antral follicle count: practical recommendations for better standardization. Fertil Steril 2010;94:1044–51.
Seifer DB, MacLaughlin DT, Penzias AS, Behrman HR, Asmundson L,
Donahoe PK, et al. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist-induced differences in granulosa cell cycle kinetics are associated with alterations in
follicular ﬂuid mullerian-inhibiting substance and androgen content. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;76:711–4.
Van Rooij IA, Broekmans FJ, te Velde ER, Fauser BC, Bancsi LF, de Jong FH,
Themmen AP. Serum anti-mullerian hormone levels: a novel measure of
ovarian reserve. Hum Reprod 2002;17:3065–71.
Tal R, Seifer DB. Ovarian reserve testing: a user’s guide. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;217:129–40.
Bas-Lando M, Rabinowitz R, Farkash R, Algur N, Rubinstein E,
Schonberger O, Eldar-Geva T. Prediction value of anti-mullerian hormone

380.

381.

382.

383.

384.

385.
386.
387.
388.

389.
390.

391.

392.

393.
394.

395.

396.

397.

398.

399.

(AMH) serum levels and antral follicle count (AFC) in hormonal contraceptive (HC) users and non-HC users undergoing IVF-PGD treatment. Gynecol
Endocrinol 2017;33:797–800.
Broer SL, van Disseldorp J, Broeze KA, Dolleman M, Opmeer BC, Bossuyt P,
et al. Added value of ovarian reserve testing on patient characteristics in the
prediction of ovarian response and ongoing pregnancy: an individual patient data approach. Hum Reprod Update 2013;19:26–36.
Broer SL, Dolleman M, van Disseldorp J, Broeze KA, Opmeer BC,
Bossuyt PM, et al. Prediction of an excessive response in in vitro fertilization
from patient characteristics and ovarian reserve tests and comparison in
subgroups: an individual patient data meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 2013;
100:420–9.e7.
Nelson SM, Pastuszek E, Kloss G, Malinowska I, Liss J, Lukaszuk A, et al.
Two new automated, compared with two enzyme-linked immunosorbent,
antimullerian hormone assays. Fertil Steril 2015;104:1016–21.e6.
Nyboe Andersen A, Nelson SM, Fauser BC, Garcia-Velasco JA, Klein BM,
Arce JC, et al. Individualized versus conventional ovarian stimulation for
in vitro fertilization: a multicenter, randomized, controlled, assessorblinded, phase 3 noninferiority trial. Fertil Steril 2017;107:387–96.e4.
Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive M. Testing
and interpreting measures of ovarian reserve: a committee opinion. Fertil
Steril 2015;103:e9–17.
Lunenfeld B. Gonadotropin stimulation: past, present and future. Reprod
Med Biol 2012;11:11–25.
Lunenfeld B. Historical perspectives in gonadotrophin therapy. Hum Reprod Update 2004;10:453–67.
Zondek B. Uber die Hormone des Hypophysenvorderlappens. Klin Wochenschr 1931;46:2121–3.
Mazer C, Ravetz E. The effect of combined administration of chorionic
gonadotropin and the pituitary synergist on the human ovary. Am J Obstet
Gynaecol 1941;41:474–588.
Borth R, Lunenfeld B, de Watteville H. Activite gonadotrope d’un extrait
d’urines de femmes en menopause. Experientia 1954;10:266–8.
American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Gonadotropin preparations: past, present, and future perspectives. Fertil Steril 2008;
90(Suppl):S13–20.
Lunenfeld B, Sulimovici S, Rabau E, Eshkol A. L’induction de l’ovulation
dans les amenorrhees hypophysaires par un traitement combine de gonadotropins urinaires menopausiques et de gonadotrophine chorioniques. C R
Soc Fr Gyncol 1962;32:346–51.
World Health Organization. WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization: Twenty-Sixth Report. World Health Orgnaiztion Technicl
Report Series No. 565. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1975. Available at: http://whqlibdoc.who.int/trs/WHO_TRS_565.pdf.
United States Pharmacopeial Convention. The United States Pharmacopeia. Rockville, MD: United States Pharmacopeial Convention; 2017.
Ezcurra D, Humaidan P. A review of luteinising hormone and human chorionic gonadotropin when used in assisted reproductive technology. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2014;12:95.
Casarini L, Lispi M, Longobardi S, Milosa F, La Marca A, Tagliasacchi D, et al.
LH and hCG action on the same receptor results in quantitatively and qualitatively different intracellular signalling. PLoS One 2012;7:e46682.
Steelman SL, Pohley FM. Assay of the follicle stimulating hormone based
on the augmentation with human chorionic gonadotropin. Endocrinology
1953;53:604–16.
Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use. Assessment report:
Bemfola, international non-propiretary name: Follitropin alfa. Procedure
No. EMA/H/C/002615. EMA/65507/2013 rev. 1. London: European Medicines Agency. Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Public_assessment_report/human/002615/WC5001
66820.pdf.
Fertility Biotech AG. Phase III study comparing efﬁcacy and safety of AFOLIA vs Gonal-f® RFF in women (35 to 42) undergoing IVF, First posted:
September 19, 2012; last update posted: December 5, 2017. Available
at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01687712.
Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use. Assessment report:
Ovaleap, international non-proprietary name: follitropin alfa. Procedure

318
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

400.

401.

402.

403.

404.

405.

406.

407.

408.

409.

410.

411.

412.

413.

414.

415.

416.

417.

No. H/C/002608. EMA/CHMP/41457/2013. London: European Medicines
Agency. Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_
library/EPAR_-_Public_assessment_report/human/002608/WC5001529
08.pdf.
Olsson H, Sandstrom R, Grundemar L. Different pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone
(rFSH) derived from a human cell line compared with rFSH from a nonhuman cell line. J Clin Pharmacol 2014;54:1299–307.
Nyboe Andersen A, Nelson SM, Fauser BC, Garcia-Velasco JA, Klein BM,
Arce JC. Individualized versus conventional ovarian stimulation for
in vitro fertilization: a multicenter, randomized, controlled, assessorblinded, phase 3 noninferiority trial. Fertil Steril 2017;107:387–96.e4.
Merck KGaA. Investigation of a long-acting follicle stimulating hormone in
infertile women undergoing assisted reproductive technology (ART), First
posted: July 23, 2007; last update posted: February 13, 2014. Available
at: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00505752.
Pouwer AW, Farquhar C, Kremer JA. Long-acting FSH versus daily FSH for
women undergoing assisted reproduction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2015;7:CD009577.
Ulloa-Aguirre A, Midgley AR Jr, Beitins IZ, Padmanabhan V. Follicle-stimulating isohormones: characterization and physiological relevance. Endocr
Rev 1995;16:765–87.
Macklon NS, Stouffer RL, Giudice LC, Fauser BC. The science behind 25
years of ovarian stimulation for in vitro fertilization. Endocr Rev 2006;27:
170–207.
Al-Inany HG, Youssef MA, Ayeleke RO, Brown J, Lam WS, Broekmans FJ.
Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonists for assisted reproductive
technology. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;(4):CD001750.
Farquhar C, Marjoribanks J, Brown J, Fauser BCJM, Lethaby A, Mourad S,
et al. Management of ovarian stimulation for IVF: narrative review of evidence provided for World Health Organization guidance. Reprod Biomed
Online 2017;35:3–16.
Fatemi HM, Doody K, Griesinger G, Witjes H, Mannaerts B. High ovarian
response does not jeopardize ongoing pregnancy rates and increases cumulative pregnancy rates in a GnRH-antagonist protocol. Hum Reprod
2013;28:442–52.
Drakopoulos P, Blockeel C, Stoop D, Camus M, de Vos M, Tournaye H,
Polyzos NP. Conventional ovarian stimulation and single embryo transfer
for IVF/ICSI. How many oocytes do we need to maximize cumulative live
birth rates after utilization of all fresh and frozen embryos? Hum Reprod
2016;31:370–6.
Steward RG, Lan L, Shah AA, Yeh JS, Price TM, Goldfarb JM, Muasher SJ.
Ooycte number as predictor for ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome and
live birth. Fertil Steril 2014;101:967–73.
Baker VL, Brown MB, Luke B, Smith GW, Ireland JJ. Gonadotropin dose
is negatively correlated with live birth rate: analysis of more than
650,000 assisted reproductive technology cycles. Fertil Steril 2015;
104:1145–52.
Mourad S, Brown J, Farquhar C. Interventions for the prevention of OHSS in
ART cycles: an overview of Cochrane reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2017;(1):CD012103.
Baker VL, Borwn MB, Luke B, Conrad K. Association of number of
retrieved oocytes with live birth rate and birth weight. Fertil Steril
2015b;103:931–8.
Kamath MS, Kirubakaran R, Mascarenhas M, Sunkara SK. Perinatal outcomes after stimulated versus natural IVF: a systematic review and meta
analysis. Reprod Biomed Online 2017;36:94–101.
Kolibianakis EM, Venetis CA, Diedrich K, Tarlatzis B, Criesinger G. Addition
of growth hormone to gonadotrophins in ovarian stimulation of poor responders treated by in-vitro fertilization: a systematic review and meta –
analysis. Hum Reprod Update 2009;15:613–22.
Ferrraretti AP, La Marca A, Fauser BCJM, Tarlatzis BC, Nargund G,
Gianaroli L, et al. ESHRE Consensus of the deﬁnition of ‘poor response’
to ovarian stimulation for in vitro fertilization: a Bologna criteria. Hum Reprod 2011;26:1616–24.
Kyrou D, Kolibianakis EM, Venetis CA, Papanikolaou EG, Bontis J,
Tarlatzis BC. How to improve the probability of pregnancy of poor re-

418.

419.

420.
421.

422.

423.
424.
425.
426.

427.

428.

429.

430.

431.

432.

433.

434.

435.

436.

437.

sponders undergoing in vitro fertilization: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Fertil Steril 2009;91:749–66.
Bosdou JK, Venetis CA, Kolibianakis EM, Toulis KA, Goulis DG, Zepiridis L,
Tarlatzis BC. The use of adrogens or androgen-modulationg agents in poor
responders undergoing in vitro fertilization: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Hum Reprod Update 2012;18:127–45.
Bosdou JK, Venetis CA, Dafopoulos K, Zepiridis L, Chatzimeletiou K,
Anifandis G, et al. Transdermal testosterone pretreatment in poor undergoing ICSI. Hum Reprod 2016;31:977–85.
Dosouto C, Haahr T, Humaidan P. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
agonist (GnRHa) trigger - State of the art. Reprod Biol 2017;17:1–8.
Baart EB, Martini E, Eijkemans J, Opstal D, Beckers NGM, Verhoeff A, et al.
Milder ovarian stimulation for in-vitro fertilization reduces aneuploidy in
the human preimplantation embryo: a randomized controlled trial. Hum
Reprod 2007;22:980–8.
Heijnen EMEW, Eijkemans MJC, De Klerk C, Polinder S, Beckers NGM,
Klinkert ER, et al. A mild treatment strategy for in-vitro fertilisation: a randomised non-inferiority trial. Lancet 2007;369:743–79.
Nargund G, Datta AK, Fauser BCJM. Mild stimulation for in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 2017;108:558–67.
Fauser BCJM. Patient-tailored ovarian stimulation for in vitro fertilization.
Fertil Steril 2017;108:585–91.
Donnez J, Dolmans MM. Fertility preservation in women. N Engl J Med
2017;377:1657–65.
Meldrum DR, Chang RJ, Lu J, Vale W, Rivier J, Judd HL. "Medical oophorectomy" using a long-acting GNRH agonist–a possible new approach to the
treatment of endometriosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1982;54(5):1081–3.
Meldrum DR, Tsao Z, Monroe SE, Braunstein GD, Sladek J, Lu JK, et al. Stimulation of LH fragments with reduced bioactivity following GnRH agonist
administration in women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1984;58(4):755–7.
Meldrum DR, Wisot A, Hamilton F, Gutlay AL, Kempton WF, Huynh D.
Routine pituitary suppression with leuprolide before ovarian stimulation
for oocyte retrieval. Fertil Steril 1989;51(3):455–9.
Pellicer A, Simon C, Miro F, Castellvi A, Ruiz A, Ruiz M, et al. Ovarian
response and outcome of in-vitro fertilization in patients treated with
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues in different phases of the
menstrual cycle. Hum Reprod 1989;4:285-9.
Cedars MI, Surey E, Hamilton F, Lapolt P, Meldrum DR. Leuprolide acetate
lowers circulating bioactive luteinizing hormone and testosterone concentrations during ovarian stimulation for oocyte retrieval. Fertil Steril 1990;53:
627–31.
Coomarasamy A, Afnan M, Cheema D, van der Veen F, Bossuyt PM, van
Wely M. Urinary hMG versus recombinant FSH for controlled ovarian hyperstimulation following an agonist long down-regulation protocol in IVF
or ICSI treatment: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod
2008;23:310–5.
Schoolcraft W, Sinton E, Schlenker T, Huynh D, Hamilton F, Meldrum DR.
Lower pregnancy rate with premature luteinization during pituitary suppression with leuprolide acetate. Fertil Steril 1991;55(3):563–6.
Werner MD, Forman EJ, Hong KH, Franasiak JM, Molinaro TA, Scott RT Jr.
Deﬁning the "sweet spot" for administered luteinizing hormone-tofollicle-stimulating hormone gonadotropin ratios during ovarian stimulation to protect against a clinically signiﬁcant late follicular increase in progesterone: an analysis of 10,280 ﬁrst in vitro fertilization cycles. Fertil Steril
2014;102(5):1312–7.
Gonen Y, Balakier H, Powell W, Casper RF. Use of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone agonist to trigger follicular maturation for in vitro fertilization. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1990;71(4):918–22.
Itskovitz J, Boldes R, Levron J, Erlik Y, Kahana L, Brandes JM. Induction of
preovulatory luteinizing hormone surge and prevention of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome by gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist. Fertil
Steril 1991;56(2):213–20.
Segal S, Casper RF. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist versus human chorionic gonadotropin for triggering follicular maturation in
in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 1992;57(6):1254–8.
Itskovitz-Eldor J, Kol S, Mannaerts B. Use of a single bolus of GnRH
agonist triptorelin to trigger ovulation after GnRH antagonist ganirelix

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
319
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

438.

439.

440.

441.
442.

443.

444.
445.

446.

447.

448.

449.

450.

451.

452.

453.

454.

455.

treatment in women undergoing ovarian stimulation for assisted reproduction, with special reference to the prevention of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: preliminary report: short communication. Hum Reprod
2000;15(9):1965–8.
Kolibianakis EM, Schultze-Mosgau A, Schroer A, van Steirteghem A,
Devroey P, Diedrich K, et al. A lower ongoing pregnancy rate can be expected when GnRH agonist is used for triggering ﬁnal oocyte maturation
instead of HCG in patients undergoing IVF with GnRH antagonists. Hum
Reprod 2005;20(10):2887–92.
Casper RF, Yen SS. Induction of luteolysis in the human with a long-acting
analog of luteinizing hormone-releasing factor. Science 1979;205(4404):
408–10.
Miller I, Chuderland D, Grossman H, Ron-El R, Ben-Ami I, Shalgi R. The
Dual Role of PEDF in the Pathogenesis of OHSS: Negating Both Angiogenic and Inﬂammatory Pathways. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;
101(12):4699–709.
Penzias A. Luteal phase support. Fertil Steril 2002;77(2):318–23.
Fatemi HM, Popovic-Todorovic B, Papanikolaou E, Donoso P, Devroey P. An
update of luteal phase support in stimulated IVF cycles. Hum Reprod Update 2007;13:581–90.
Fauser BC, Devroey P. Reproductive biology and IVF: ovarian stimulation
and luteal phase consequences. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2003;14(5):
236–42.
Noyes RW, Hertig AT, Rock J. Dating the endometrial biopsy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1975;122:262–3.
Bourgain C, Ubaldi F, Tavaniotou A, Smitz JM, Steirteghem Van, et al.
Endometrial hormone receptors and proliferation index in the periovulatory phase of stimulated embryo transfer cycles in comparison with natural
cycles and relation to clinical pregnancy outcome. Fertil Steril 2002;78:
237–44.
Fatemi HM, Polyzos NP, van Vaerenbergh I, Bourgain C, Blockeel C,
et al. Early luteal phase endocrine proﬁle is affected by the mode of
triggering ﬁnal oocyte maturation and the luteal phase support used
in recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone–gonadotropin-releasing
hormone antagonist in vitro fertilization cycles. Fertil Steril 2013;100:
742–7.
Tournaye H, Sukhikh G, Kuhler E, Griesinger G. A Phase 111 randomized
controlled trial comparing the efﬁcacy, safety and tolerability of oral dydrogesterone versus micronized vaginal progesterone for luteal support in
in vitro fertilization. Hum Reprod 2017;32(5):1019–27.
Bouckaert Y, Robert F, Englert Y, De Backer D, De Vuyst P, Delbaere A.
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia associated with intramuscular administration of progesterone as luteal phase support after IVF: case report. Hum Reprod 2004;19(8):1806–10.
Baker V, Jones C, Doody K, Faulk R, Yee B, Adamson G, et al. A randomized
controlled trial comparing the efﬁcacy and safety of aqueous subcutaneous progesterone with vaginal progesterone for luteal phase support of
in vitro fertilization. Hum Reprod 2014;29(10):2210–20.
Connell MT, Szatkowski JM, Terry N, DeCherney AH, Propst AM, et al.
Timing luteal support in assisted reproductive technology: a systematic review. Fertil Steril 2015;103:939–46.
Liu X, Mu H, Shi Q, Xiao X, Qi H. The optimal duration of progesterone supplementation in pregnant women after IVF/ICSI: a meta-analysis. Reprod
Biol Endocrinol 2012;10:107–15.
Humaidan P, Bredkjaer HE, Bungum L, Bungum M, Grøndahl ML,
Westergaard L, Andersen CY, et al. GnRH agonist (buserelin) or hCG for
ovulation induction in GnRH antagonist IVF/ICSI cycles: a prospective randomized study. Hum. Reprod 2005;20(5):1213–20.
Hutchison JS, Zeleznik AJ. The corpus luteum of the primate menstrual cycle is capable of recovering from a transient withdrawal of pituitary gonadotropin support. Endocrinology 1985;117:1043–9.
Lawrenz B, Garrido N, Samir S, Ruiz F, Melado L, Fatemi H. Individual luteolysis pattern after GnRH-agonist trigger for ﬁnal oocyte maturation. PloS
One 2017;12(5):1–11.
Lawrenz B, Humaidan P, Kol S, Fatemi H. GnRHa trigger and luteal coasting: a new approach for the ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome high-risk
patient? Reprod Biomed Online 2018;36:75–7.

456.
457.

458.

459.

460.

461.

462.

463.

464.

465.

466.

467.

468.

469.

470.

471.

472.

473.
474.
475.

Southam AL, Janovskin A. Massive ovarian hyperstimulation with clomiphene citrate. JAMA 1962;181:443–5.
Dey AK, Dubey A, Mittal K, Kale S. Spontaneous ovarian hyperstimulation
syndrome. Understanding the dilemma. Gynecol Endocrinol 2015;1(8):
587–9.
Kawwass JF, Kissin DM, Kulkarni AD, Creanga AA, Session DR,
Callaghan WM, et al, National ART Surveillance System (NASS) Group.
Safety of assisted reproductive technology in the United States, 20002011. JAMA 2015;313(1):88–90.
mez R, Soares SR, Busso C, Garcia-Velasco JA, Simon C, Pellicer A. PhysGo
iology and Pathology of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Sem Reprod
Med 2010;28:448–57.
mez R, Ferrero H, Delgado-Rosas F, Gaytan M, Morales C,
Go
Zimmermann RC, et al. Evidences for the existence of a low dopaminergic
tone in polycystic ovarian syndrome: implications for OHSS development
and treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96(8):2484–92.
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Green-top guideline
No.5: ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, management. Available at:
https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/guidelines/gtg5/.
Accessed February 26, 2015.
Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine.
Prevention and treatment of moderate and severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Fertil Steril 2016;106(7):1634–47.
Gonen Y, Balakier H, Powell W, Casper RF. Use of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone agonist to trigger follicular maturation for in vitro fertilization. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1990;71(4):918–22.
Dong J, Wang Y, Chai WR, Hong QQ, Wang NL, Sun LH, et al. The pregnancy outcome of progestin-primed ovarian stimulation using 4 versus
10 mg of medroxyprogesterone acetate per day in infertile women undergoing in vitro fertilisation: a randomised controlled trial. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 2017;124(7):1048–55.
Cobo A, Serra V, Garrido N, Olmo I, Pellicer A, Remohí J. Obstetric and perinatal outcome of babies born from vitriﬁed oocytes. Fertil Steril 2014;
102(4):1006–15.
Humaidan P, Polyzos NP, Alsbjerg B, Erb K, Mikkelsen AL, Elbaek HO, et al.
GnRHa trigger and individualized luteal phase hCG support according to
ovarian response to stimulation: two prospective randomized controlled
multi-centre studies in IVF patients. Hum Reprod 2013;28(9):2511–21.
Meyer L, Murphy LA, Gumer A, Reichman DE, Rosenwaks Z, Cholst IN. Risk
factors for a suboptimal response to gonadotropin-releasing hormone
agonist trigger during in vitro fertilization cycles. Fertil Steril 2015;104(3):
637–42.
Abbara A, Jayasena CN, Christopoulos G, Narayanaswamy S, IzziEngbeaya C, Nijher GM, et al. Efﬁcacy of Kisspeptin-54 to Trigger Oocyte
Maturation in women at high risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome
(OHSS) during in vitro fertilization (IVF) therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2015;100(9):3322–31.
Ferraretti AP, Gianaroli L, Diotallevi L, Festi C, Trounson AO. Dopamine
treatment for severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Hum Reprod
1992;7(2):180–3.
Mai Q, Hu X, Yang G, Luo Y, Huang K, Yuan Y, et al. Effect of letrozole on
moderate and severe early-onset ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome in
high-risk women: a prospective randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2017;216(1):42.e1–10.
€er BJ, Robinson HP. Ultrasound examination of the growing
Hackelo
ovarian follicle and of the corpus luteum during the normal physiology
of menstrual cycle. Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd 1978;38:163–8.
Holm HH, Kvist Kristensen J, Norby Rasmusssen S, Northeved A, Barlebo H.
Ultrasound as a guide in percutaneous puncture technique. Ultrasonic
1972;10:83–6.
Lenz S, Lauritsen JG, Kjellow M. Collection of human oocytes for in vitro
fertilization by ultrasonically guided puncture. Lancet 1981;1:1163–4.
Wikland M, Nilsson L, Hansson R, Hamberger L, Janson PO. Collection of
human oocytes by the use of sonography. Fertil Steril 1983;39:603–8.
Dellenbach P, Nisand I, Moreau L, Feger B, Plumere C, Gerlinger P, et al.
Transvaginal, sonographically controlled ovarian follicle puncture for egg
retrieval. Lancet 1984;1:1467.

320
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
476.

477.

478.
479.

480.

481.

482.

483.

484.

485.
486.

487.
488.
489.
490.
491.
492.

493.
494.
495.

496.

497.
498.

499.
500.

Parsons J, Riddle A, Booker M, Sharma V, Goswamy R, Wilson L, et al.
Oocyte retrieval for in-vitro fertilisation by ultrasonically guided needle
aspiration via the urethra. Lancet 1985;1:1076–7.
Lewin A, Laufer N, Rabinowitz R, Margalioth EJ, Bar I, Schenker JG. Ultrasonically guided oocyte collection under local anesthesia: the ﬁrst choice
method for in vitro fertilization - a comparative study with laparoscopy. Fertil Steril 1986;46:257–61.
Meldrum DR, Chetkowski RJ, Steingold KA, Randle D. Transvaginal ultrasound scanning of ovarian follicles. Fertil Steril 1984;42:803–5.
Wikland M, Enk L, Hamberger L. Transvesical and transvaginal approaches
for the aspiration of follicles by use of ultrasound. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1985;
442:182–94.
Feichtinger W, Kemeter P. Transvaginal sector scan sonography for needle
guided transvaginal follicle aspiration and other applications in gynecologic routine and research. Fertil Steril 1986;45:722–5.
Aragona C, Mohamed MA, Espinola MS, Linari A, Pecorini F, Micara G,
Sbracia M. Clinical complications after transvaginal oocyte retrieval in
7,098 IVF cycles. Fertil Steril 2011;95:293–4.
Kwan I, Bhattacharya S, Kang A, Woolner A. Monitoring of stimulated cycles in assisted reproduction (IVF and ICSI). Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2014;(8):CD005289.
Raine-Fenning N, Deb S, Jayaprakasan K, Clewes J, Hopkisson J, Campbell B.
Timing of oocyte maturation and egg collection during controlled ovarian
stimulation: a randomized controlled trial evaluating manual and automated
measurements of follicle diameter. Fertil Steril 2010;94:184–8.
Kasius A, Smit JG, Torrance HL, Eijkemans MJ, Mol BW, Opmeer BC,
Broekmans FJ. Endometrial thickness and pregnancy rates after IVF: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Update 2014;20:530–41.
Strickler RC, Christianson C, Crane JP, Curato A, Knight AB, Yang V. Ultrasound guidance for human embryo transfer. Fertil Steril 1985;43:54–61.
Teixeira DM, Dassunç~ao LA, Vieira CV, Barbosa MA, Coelho Neto MA,
Nastri CO, Martins WP. Ultrasound guidance during embryo transfer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2015;45:139–48.
Lewenhoeck DA. Observationes D. Anthonii Lewenhoeck, de natis'e semine
genitali animalculis. Philosophical Transactions 1677;12:1040–1046.
Leeuwenhoek AV. Digital Library of Dutch Literature. In: Alle de brieven
Deel 2: 1676-1679, Vol. 2. Amsterdam: Swets & Zeitlinger; 1941:281–93.
Hotchkiss R. General considerations. In: Fertility in Men. Philadelphia, PA:
JB Lippincott Co; 1944:1.
Cary WH. Sterility diagnosis: study of sperm cell migration in the female secretions and interpretation of ﬁndings. N Y State J Med 1930;30:131–6.
Amelar RD, Dubin L. Semen analysis. In: Amelar RD, Dubin L, Walsh PC, editors. Male Infertility. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co; 1977:105–40.
Cooper TG, Noonan E, von Eckardstein S, Auger J, Baker HW, Behre HM,
et al. World Health Organization reference values for human semen characteristics. Hum Reprod Update 2010;16:231–45.
Organization WH. WHO laboratory manual for the examination and processing of human semen. 5 ed. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press; 2010.
Skakkebaek NE. Normal reference ranges for semen quality and their relations to fecundity. Asian J Androl 2010;12:95–8.
Guzick DS, Overstreet JW, Factor-Litvak P, Brazil CK, Nakajima ST,
Coutifaris C, et al. Sperm morphology, motility, and concentration in fertile
and infertile men. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1388–93.
Menkveld R, Stander FS, Kotze TJ, Kruger TF, van Zyl JA. The evaluation of
morphological characteristics of human spermatozoa according to stricter
criteria. Hum Reprod (Oxford, England) 1990;5:586–92.
Bogdanich W. Lax laboratories: the Pap test misses much cervical cancer
through labs’ error. In: Wall Street J 1987.
Yanagimachi R, Yanagimachi H, Rogers BJ. The use of zona-free animal ova
as a test-system for the assessment of the fertilizing capacity of human
spermatozoa. Biol Reprod 1976;15:471–6.
Evenson DP, Darzynkiewicz Z, Melamed MR. Relation of mammalian sperm
chromatin heterogeneity to fertility. Science 1980;210:1131–3.
Schoor RA, Elhanbly A, Niederberger CN, Ross LS. The Role of testicular biopsy in the modern managmement of male infertility. J Urol 2002;167:
197–200.

501.

502.

503.

504.
505.
506.
507.

508.

509.
510.

511.
512.

513.

514.
515.

516.

517.
518.

519.

520.

521.

522.
523.
524.

Jarow J, Sigman M, Kolettis PN, Lipshultz LR, Dale McClure R, Nangia AK,
et al. The evaluation of the azoospermic male. Available at: http://
www.auanet.org/guidelines/male-infertility-azoospermic-male-(reviewedand-amended-2011).
Foresta C, Garolla A, Ferlin A, Rossato M, Candiani F. Doppler Ultrasound
of the testis in azoospermic subjects as a parameter of testicular function.
Hum Reprod 1998;13:3090–3.
Russell LD, Pen HP, Himim SI, Schulze W, Himim AS. A comparative study in
twelve mammalian species of volume densitiesm volumes, and numerical
densities of selected testis components, emphasizing those related to sertoli cell. Developmental Dynamics 1990;188:21–30.
Cornud F, Berlin X, Delafontain D, Amar T, Helenon J, Moreau JF. Imaging
of obstructive azoospermia. Eur Radiol 1997;6:1079–85.
Honig SC, Lipshulz LI, Jarow J. Signiﬁcant medical pathology uncovered by
a comprehensive male infertility evaluation. Fertil Steril 1994;62:1028–34.
Colengelo SM, Fried K, Hyacynthe L, Fracchia JA. Tubular ectasia of the rete
testis: an ultrasound diagnosis. Urology 1995;45:532–4.
Pilatz A, Rusz A, Wagenlehner F, Weidner W, Altinkilic B. Reference values
for testicular volume, epididymal head size and peak systolic velocity of the
testicular artery in adult males measured by ultrasonography. Ultraschall in
Med 2013;34:349–54.
Pinggera GM, Mitterberger M, Bartsch G, Straser H, Gradi J, Aigner F, et al.
Assessment of intratesticular resistive index by colour Doppler ultrasonography meausrements as a predictor of spermatogenesis. BJUI 2008;101:722–6.
Jarow JP. Seminal vesicle aspiration in the management of patients with
ejaculatory duct obstruction. J Urol 1994;152:899–901.
Cooperberg MR, Fang R, Schlossberg S, Wolf S Jr, Clemins JQ. The AUA
Quality Registry: engaging stakeholders to improve the quality of care
for patients with prostate cancer. Urology Practice 2017;4:30–5.
Ghani K, Zheng K. Harnessing big data for health care and research: are
urologists ready? European Urology 2014;66:975–7.
Chen Y, Argentinis E, Weber G. IBM Watson: how cognitive computing
can be applied to big data challenges in life sciences research. Clinical Therapeutics 2016;38:688–701.
Turek PJ, Cha I, Ljung BM. Systematic ﬁne-needle aspiration of the testis:
correlation to biopsy and results of organ ‘‘mapping’’ for mature sperm
in azoospermic men. Urology 1997;49(5):743–8.
Schlegel PN. Testicular sperm extraction: microdissection improves sperm
yield with minimal tissue excision. Hum Reprod 1999;14:131–5.
Hopps CV, Goldstein M, Schlegel PN. The diagnosis and treatment of the
azoospermic patient in the age of intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Urology Clinics 2002;29:895–911.
Nagy Z, Liu J, Cecile J, Silber S, Devroey P. Using ejaculated, fresh, and frozenthawed epididymal and testicular spermatozoa gives rise to comparable
results after intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Fertil Steril 1995;63(4):
808–15.
Silber S. Microsurgical aspects of varicocele. Fertil Steril 1979;31(2):230–2.
Marmar J, DeBenedictis T, Praiss D. The management of varicoceles by
microdissection of the spermatic cord at the external inguinal ring. Fertil
Steril 1985;43:583–8.
Goldstein M, Gilbert BR, Dicker AP, Dwosh J, Gnecco C. Microsurgical
inguinal varicocelectomy with delivery of the testis: an artery and lymphatic
sparing technique. J Urol 1992;148:1808–11.
Orhan I, Onur R, Semercioz A, Firdolas F, Ardicoglu A, Koksal I. Comparison
of two different microsurgical methods in the treatment of varicocele. Arch
Androl 2005;51(3):213–20.
Goldstein M. Surgical management of male infertility. In: Wein AJ,
Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, editors. Campbell-Walsh Urology.
11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:580–611.
Ramasamy R, Schlegel P. Microsurgical inguinal varicocelectomy with and
without testicular delivery. Urology 2006;68:1323–6.
Carbone DJ, Merhoff V. Complication rate of microsurgical varicocele ligation without delivery of the testis. Arch Androl 2003;49(3):201–4.
Ashkenazi J, Dicker D, Feldberg D, Shelef M, Goldman G, Goldman J. The
impact of spermatic vein ligation on the male factor in in-vitro fertilizationembryo transfer and its relation to testosterone levels before and after
operation. Fertil Steril 1989;51(3):471–4.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
321
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
525.

526.

527.

528.
529.
530.
531.

532.
533.
534.
535.
536.
537.

538.

539.

540.
541.

542.

543.

544.

545.

546.
547.
548.
549.

Esteves S, Oliveira F, Bertolla R. Clinical outcome of intracytoplasmic sperm
injection in infertile men with treated and untreated varicocele. J Urol
2010;184:1442–6.
Daitch JA, Bedaiwy MA, Pasqualotto EB, Hendin BN, Hallak J, Falcone T,
et al. Varicocelectomy improves intrauterine insemination success rates in
men with varicocele. J Urol 2001;165(5):1510–3.
Kirby E, Weiner L, Rajanahally S, Crowell K, Corward R. Undergoing varicocele repair prior to assisted reproduction improves pregnancy rate and live
birth rate in azoospermic and oligospermic men with varicocele: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 2016;106:1338–43.
Fernandes M, Shah K, Draper J. Vasovasostomy: Improved microsurgical
technique. J Urol 1968;100:763–6.
Silber S. Microscopic vasectomy reversal. Fertil Steril 1977;28(11):1191–
202.
Owen E. Microsurgical vasovasostomy: A reliable vasectomy reversal. ANZ
Journal of Surgery 1977;47(3):305–9.
Belker A, Thomas A, Fuchs E, Konnak J, Sharlip I. Results of 1,469 microsurgical vasectomy reversals by the vasovasostomy study group. J Urol 1991;
145:505–11.
Goldstein M, Li PS, Matthews GJ. Microsurgical vasovasostomy: the
microdot technique of precision suture placement. J Urol 1998;159:188–90.
Silber S. Microscopic vasoepididymostomy: Speciﬁc microanastomosis to
the epididyal tubule. Fertil Steril 1978;30:565–71.
Wagenknecht L, Klosterhalfen H, Schirren C. Microsurgery in andrologic
urology I. Refertilization. J Microsurg 1980;1(5):370–6.
Fogedstam I, Fall M, Nilsson S. Microsurgical epididymovasostomy in the
treatment of occlusive azoospermia. Fertil Steril 1986;46(5):925–9.
Berger R. Triangulation end-to-side vasoepididymostomy. J Urol 1998;
159(6):1951–3.
Chan P, Brandell R, Goldstein M. Prospective analysis of outcomes after
microsurgical intussusception vaso-epididymostomy. BJU Int 2005;96(4):
598–601.
Edwards RG, Fishel SB, Cohen J, Fehilly CB, Purdy JM, Slater JM, et al. Factors inﬂuencing the success of in vitro fertilization for alleviating human
infertility. J In Vitro Fert Embryo Transf 1984;1(1):3–23.
Palermo G, Joris H, Devroey P, Van Steirteghem AC. Pregnancies after intracytoplasmic injection of single spermatozoon into an oocyte. Lancet
1992;340(8810):17–8.
Jow WW, Steckel J, Schlegel PN, Magid MS, Goldstein M. Motile sperm in
human testis biopsy specimens. J Androl 1993;14(3):194–8.
Silber SJ, Nagy ZP, Liu J, Godoy H, Devroey P, Van Steirteghem AC. Conventional in-vitro fertilization versus intracytoplasmic sperm injection for patients requiring microsurgical sperm aspiration. Hum Reprod 1994;9(9):
1705–9.
Schlegel PN, Palermo GD, Alikani M, Adler A, Reing AM, Cohen J,
Rosenwaks Z. Micropuncture retrieval of epididymal sperm with in vitro
fertilization: importance of in vitro micromanipulation techniques. Urology
1995;46(2):238–41.
Schlegel PN, Palermo GD, Goldstein M, Menendez S, Zaninovic N,
Veeck LL, Rosenwaks Z. Testicular sperm extraction with intracytoplasmic
sperm injection for nonobstructive azoospermia. Urology 1997;49(3):
435–40.
Lewin A, Weiss DB, Friedler S, Ben-Shachar I, Porat-Katz A, Meirow D, et al.
Delivery following intracytoplasmic injection of mature sperm cells recovered by testicular ﬁne needle aspiration in a case of hypergonadotropic
azoospermia due to maturation arrest. Hum Reprod 1996;11(4):769–71.
Ostad M, Liotta D, Ye Z, Schlegel PN. Testicular sperm extraction for nonobstructive azoospermia: results of a multibiopsy approach with optimized
tissue dispersion. Urology 1998;52(4):692–6.
Schlegel PN, Su LM. Physiological consequences of testicular sperm extraction. Hum Reprod 1997;12(8):1688–92.
Dardashti K, Williams RH, Goldstein M. Microsurgical testis biopsy: a novel
technique for retrieval of testicular tissue. J Urol 2000;163(4):1206–7.
Schlegel PN. Testicular sperm extraction: microdissection improves sperm
yield with minimal tissue excision. Hum Reprod 1999;14(1):131–5.
Silber SJ, Nagy Z, Devroey P, Tournaye H, Van Steirteghem AC. Distribution
of spermatogenesis in the testicles of azoospermic men: the presence or

550.

551.

552.

553.

554.

555.

556.
557.

558.

559.

560.

561.

562.

563.

564.

565.
566.
567.

568.

569.

570.

absence of spermatids in the testes of men with germinal failure. Hum Reprod 1997;12(11):2422–8.
Ramasamy R, Reifsnyder JE, Husseini J, Eid PA, Bryson C, Schlegel PN. Localization of sperm during microdissection testicular sperm extraction in men
with non-obstructive azoospermia. J Urol 2013;189(2):643–6.
Bernie AM, Mata DA, Ramasamy R, Schlegel PN. Comparison of microdissection testicular sperm extraction, conventional testicular sperm extraction, and testicular sperm aspiration for nonobstructive azoospermia: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 2015;104(5):1099–103.
Ramasamy R, Yagan N, Schlegel PN. Structural and functional changes to
the testis after conventional versus microdissection testicular sperm extraction. Urology 2005;65:1190–4.
Deruyver Y, Vanderschueren D, Van der Aa F. Outcome of microdissection
TESE compared with conventional TESE in non-obstructive azoospermia: a
systematic review. Andrology 2014;2(1):20–4.
Heckert LL, Griswold MD. The expression of the follicle-stimulating hormone receptor in spermatogenesis. Recent Prog Horm Res 2002;57:
129–48.
Verhoeven G, Cailleau J. Follicle-stimulating hormone and androgens increase the concentration of the androgen receptor in Sertoli cells. Endocrinology 1988;122(4):1541–50.
Kim ED, Crosnoe L, Bar-Chama N, Khera M, Lipshultz L. The treatment of
hypogonadism in men of reproductive age. Fertil Steril 2013;99(3):718–24.
Pitteloud N, Hayes FJ, Dwyer A, Boepple PA, Lee H, Crowley WF Jr. Predictors of outcome of long-term GnRH therapy in men with idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002;87(9):
4128–36.
Hussein A, Ozgok Y, Ross L, Niederberger C. Clomiphene administration
for cases of nonobstructive azoospermia: a multicenter study. J Androl
2005;26(6):787–92.
Hussein A, Ozgok Y, Ross L, Rao P, Niederberger C. Optimization of
spermatogenesis-regulating hormones in patients with non-obstructive
azoospermia and its impact on sperm retrieval: a multicentre study. BJUI
2013;111:110–4.
Selman HA, Cipollone G, Stuppia L, De Santo M, Sterzik K, El-Danasouri I.
Gonadotropin treatment of an azoospermic patient with a Y-chromosome
microdeletion. Fertil Steril 2004;82:218–9.
Efesoy O, Cayan S, Akbay E. The efﬁcacy of recombinant human
follicle-stimulating hormone in the treatment of various types of
male-factor infertility at a single university hospital. J Androl 2009;30:
679–84.
Selman H, De Santo M, Sterzik K, Cipollone G, Aragona C, El-Danasouri I.
Rescue of spermatogenesis arrest in azoospermic men after long-term
gonadotropin treatment. Fertil Steril 2006;86:466–8.
Shiraishi K, Ohmi C, Shimabukuro T, Matsuyama H. Human chorionic
gonadotrophin treatment prior to microdissection testicular sperm extraction in non-obstructive azoospermia. Hum Reprod 2012;27:331–9.
Ramasamy R, Ricci JA, Palermo GD, Gosden LV, Rosenwaks Z, Schlegel PN.
Successful fertility treatment for Klinefelter's syndrome. J Urol 2009;
182(3):1108–13.
Raman JD, Schlegel PN. Aromatase inhibitors for male infertility. J Urol
2002;167:624–9.
Pavlovich CP, King P, Goldstein M, Schlegel PN. Evidence of a treatable endocrinopathy in infertile men. J Urol 2001;165(3):837–41.
Hussein A. Evaluation of diagnostic testis biopsy and the repetition of
testicular sperm extraction surgeries in infertility patients. Fertil Steril
2013;100(1):88–93.
Silber SJ, Ord T, Balmaceda J, Patrizio P, Asch RH. Congenital absence of
the vas deferens. The fertilizing capacity of human epididymal sperm. N
Engl J Med 1990;323:1788–92.
Silber SJ, Nagy ZP, Liu J, Godoy H, Devroey P, Van Steirteghem AC. Conventional in-vitro fertilization versus intracytoplasmic sperm injection for patients requiring microsurgical sperm aspiration. Hum Reprod 1994;9:
1705–9.
Oates RD, Lobel SM, Harris DH, Pang S, Burgess CM, Carson RS. Efﬁcacy of
intracytoplasmic sperm injection using intentionally cryopreserved epididymal spermatozoa. Hum Reprod 1996;11:133–8.

322
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®
571.

572.

573.

574.

575.

576.

577.

578.

579.

580.

581.

582.

583.
584.

585.

586.

587.

588.

589.

Oates RD, Mulhall J, Burgess C, Cunningham D, Carson R. Fertilization and
pregnancy using intentionally cryopreserved testicular tissue as the sperm
source for intracytoplasmic sperm injection in 10 men with non-obstructive
azoospermia. Hum Reprod 1997;12:734–9.
Kerem B, Rommens JM, Buchanan JA, Markiewicz D, Cox TK,
Chakravarti A, et al. Identiﬁcation of the cystic ﬁbrosis gene: genetic analysis. Science 1989;245:1073–80.
Riordan JR, Rommens JM, Kerem B, Alon N, Rozmahel R, Grzelczak Z, et al.
Identiﬁcation of the cystic ﬁbrosis gene: cloning and characterization of
complementary DNA. Science 1989;245:1066–73.
Rommens JM, Iannuzzi MC, Kerem B, Drumm ML, Melmer G, Dean M,
et al. Identiﬁcation of the cystic ﬁbrosis gene: chromosome walking and
jumping. Science 1989;245:1059–65.
Anguiano A, Oates RD, Amos JA, Dean M, Gerrard B, Stewart C, et al.
Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens. A primarily genital form
of cystic ﬁbrosis. JAMA 1992;267:1794–7.
McCallum T, Milunsky J, Munarriz R, Carson R, Sadeghi-Nejad H, Oates R.
Unilateral renal agenesis associated with congenital bilateral absence of
the vas deferens: phenotypic ﬁndings and genetic considerations. Hum Reprod 2001;16:282–8.
Mulhall JP, Burgess CM, Cunningham D, Carson R, Harris D, Oates RD.
Presence of mature sperm in testicular parenchyma of men with nonobstructive azoospermia: prevalence and predictive factors. Urology 1997;
49:91–5, discussion 5–6.
Tiepolo L, Zuffardi O. Localization of factors controlling spermatogenesis in
the nonﬂuorescent portion of the human Y chromosome long arm. Hum
Genet 1976;34:119–24.
Kuroda-Kawaguchi T, Skaletsky H, Brown LG, Minx PJ, Cordum HS,
Waterston RH, et al. The AZFc region of the Y chromosome features
massive palindromes and uniform recurrent deletions in infertile men.
Nat Genet 2001;29:279–86.
Repping S, Skaletsky H, Lange J, Silber S, Van Der Veen F, Oates RD, et al.
Recombination between palindromes P5 and P1 on the human Y chromosome causes massive deletions and spermatogenic failure. Am J Hum
Genet 2002;71:906–22.
Rozen SG, Marszalek JD, Irenze K, Skaletsky H, Brown LG, Oates RD, et al.
AZFc deletions and spermatogenic failure: a population-based survey of
20,000 Y chromosomes. Am J Hum Genet 2012;91:890–6.
Vogt PH, Edelmann A, Kirsch S, Henegariu O, Hirschmann P, Kiesewetter F,
et al. Human Y chromosome azoospermia factors (AZF) mapped to
different subregions in Yq11. Hum Mol Genet 1996;5:933–43.
Schlegel PN, Li PS. Microdissection TESE: sperm retrieval in non-obstructive
azoospermia. Hum Reprod Update 1998;4:439.
Hopps CV, Mielnik A, Goldstein M, Palermo GD, Rosenwaks Z,
Schlegel PN. Detection of sperm in men with Y chromosome microdeletions of the AZFa, AZFb and AZFc regions. Hum Reprod 2003;
18:1660–5.
Oates RD, Silber S, Brown LG, Page DC. Clinical characterization of 42 oligospermic or azoospermic men with microdeletion of the AZFc region of
the Y chromosome, and of 18 children conceived via ICSI. Hum Reprod
2002;17:2813–24.
Mulhall JP, Reijo R, Alagappan R, Brown L, Page D, Carson R, et al. Azoospermic men with deletion of the DAZ gene cluster are capable of
completing spermatogenesis: fertilization, normal embryonic development
and pregnancy occur when retrieved testicular spermatozoa are used for
intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Hum Reprod 1997;12:503–8.
Lange J, Skaletsky H, van Daalen SK, Embry SL, Korver CM, Brown LG, et al.
Isodicentric Y chromosomes and sex disorders as byproducts of homologous recombination that maintains palindromes. Cell 2009;138:855–69.
Klinefelter HF, Reifenstein EC, Albright F. Syndrome characterized by
gynaecomastis, aspermatogenesis without a-Leydigism, and increased
excretion of folicle stimulating hormone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1942;
2:615–27.
Palermo GD, Schlegel PN, Sills ES, Veeck LL, Zaninovic N, Menendez S, et al.
Births after intracytoplasmic injection of sperm obtained by testicular
extraction from men with nonmosaic Klinefelter's syndrome. N Engl J
Med 1998;338:588–90.

590.

591.

592.
593.

594.

595.

596.

597.

598.

599.
600.
601.

602.

603.

604.

605.
606.
607.

608.

609.

610.

611.

Tournaye H, Staessen C, Liebaers I, Van Assche E, Devroey P, Bonduelle M,
et al. Testicular sperm recovery in nine 47,XXY Klinefelter patients. Hum
Reprod 1996;11:1644–9.
Damani MN, Mittal R, Oates RD. Testicular tissue extraction in a young
male with 47,XXY Klinefelter's syndrome: potential strategy for preservation of fertility. Fertil Steril 2001;76:1054–6.
Mehta A, Paduch DA. Klinefelter syndrome: an argument for early aggressive hormonal and fertility management. Fertil Steril 2012;98:274–83.
Noone AM, Howlader N, Krapcho M, Miller D, Brest A, Yu M, et al. SEER
Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2015, National Cancer Institute.
Available at: https://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2015/browse_csr.php?sectionSEL=2&pageSEL=sect_02_table.08. Accessed July 2, 2018.
Green DM, Liu W, Kutteh WH, Shelton KC, Sklar CK, et al. Cumulative alkylating agent exposure and semen parameters in adult survivors of childhood cancer: a report from the St Jude Lifetime Cohort Study. Lancet Oncol
2014;15(11):1215–23.
Zapzalka DM, Redmon JB, Pryor JL. A survey of oncologists regarding
sperm cryopreservation and assisted reproductive techniques for male cancer patients. Cancer 1999;86(9):1812–7.
Schover LR, Brey K, Lichtin A, Lipshultz LI, Jeha S. Knowledge and experience regarding cancer, infertility, and sperm banking in younger male survivors. J Clin Oncol 2002;20(7):1880–9.
Lee SJ, Schover LR, Partridge AH, Patrizio P, Wallace WH, Hagerty K, et al.
American Society of Clinical Oncology recommendations on fertility preservation in cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 2006;24(18):2917–31.
Sheth KR, Sharma V, Helfand BT, Cashy J, Smith K, et al. Improved fertility
preservation care for male patients with cancer after establishment of
formalized oncofertility program. J Urol 2012;187(3):979–86.
Gassei K, Orwig KE. Experimental methods to preserve male fertility and
treat male factor infertility. Fertil Steril 2016;105(2):256–66.
Moss JL, Choi AW, Fitzgerald Keeter MK, Brannigan RE. Male adolescent
fertility preservation. Fertil Steril 2016;105(2):267–73.
Silber SJ, Van Steirteghem AC, Liu J, Nagy Z, Tournaye H, Devroey P. High
fertilization and pregnancy rate after intracytoplasmic sperm injection
with spermatozoa obtained from testicle biopsy. Hum Reprod 1995;
10(1):148–52.
Prins GS, Dolgina R, Studney P, Kaplan B, Ross L, Niederberger C. Quality of
cryopreserved testicular sperm in patients with obstructive and nonobstructive azoospermia. J Urol 1999;161(5):1504–8.
Moghadam KK, Nett R, Robins JC, Thomas MA, Awadalla SG,
Scheiber MD, Williams DB. The motility of epididymal or testicular spermatozoa does not directly affect IVF/ICSI pregnancy outcomes. J Androl 2005;
26(5):619–23.
Ohlander S, Hotaling J, Kirshenbaum E, Niederberger C, Eisenberg ML.
Impact of fresh versus cryopreserved testicular sperm upon intracytoplasmic sperm injection pregnancy outcomes in men with azoospermia due
to spermatogenic dysfunction: a meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 2014;101(2):
344–9.
Ombelet W, Van Robays J. Artiﬁcial insemination history: hurdles and milestones. Facts Views Vis Obgyn 2015;7:137–43.
Sieglein v. Schmidt, 224 Md. App. 222 (2015), citing to Orford v. Orford,
58 D.L.R. 251(1921).
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws. Uniform
Parentage Act. 1973. Available at: http://www.uniformlaws.org/shared/
docs/parentage/upa73_With%20pref%20note.pdf
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws. Uniform
Parentage Act. 2002. Available at: http://uniformlaws.org/Act.aspx?title=
Parentage%20Act%20(2002).
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws. Uniform
Parentage Act. 2017. Available at: http://uniformlaws.org/Act.aspx?title=
Parentage%20Act%20(2017)
Swain MA. Oocyte donation: legal aspects. In: Goldfarb JM, editor. Thirdparty reproduction: a comprehensive guide. New York: Springer Science &
Business Media New York; 2014:31–9.
Supreme Court of the United States. Obergefell et al., v. Hodges, Director,
Ohio Department of Health, et al., 2014. Available at: https://www.
supremecourt.gov/opinions/14pdf/14-556_3204.pdf.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
323
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF
612.

613.
614.

615.

616.
617.

618.
619.

620.
621.
622.
623.
624.

625.

626.

627.

Supreme Court of the United Stated. Pavan et al. v. Smith. 2017.
Available at: https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/582/16-992/
case.pdf.
Pennings G. The non-anonymous donor: what do we know and where do
we go? Mt Med Reprod Gynecol Endocrinol 2016;18:116–22.
Fenton-Glynn C. International surrogacy before the European Court of Human Rights. J Priv Int'l L 2017;13(3):546–67, Union of India v Jan Balaz
(2015-10-121) judgment of 14 October 2015.
Evans D, Evans M. Fertility, infertility and the human embryo: ethics, law
and practice of human artiﬁcial procreation. Hum Reprod Update 1996;
2:208–24.
Gerris J, Van Royen E. Avoiding multiple pregnancies in ART: a plea for single embryo transfer. Hum Reprod 2000;15:1884–8.
Kushnir VA, Darmon SK, Shapiro AJ, Albertini DF, Barad DN, Gleicher N.
Utilization of third-party in vitro fertilization in the United States. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;216:266.e1–10.
Pennings G. Disclosure of donor conception, age of disclosure and the
well-being of donor offspring. Hum Reprod 2017;32:969–73.
Pennings G, De Mouzon J, Shenﬁeld F, Ferraretti A-P, Mardesic T, Ruiz A,
Goossens V. Socio-demographic and fertility related characteristics and
motivations of oocyte donors in eleven European countries. Hum Reprod
2014;29:1076–89.
Greenfeld DA. Effects and outcomes of third-party reproduction: parents.
Fertil Steril 2015;104:520–4.
Hammons SA. Assisted reproductive technologies: Changing conceptions
of motherhood? J Fam Soc Work 2008;23:270–80.
MacLeod AW. Some psychogenic aspects of infertility. Fertil Steril 1964;15:
124–34.
Mahlstedt P. The psychological component of infertility. Fertil Steril 1985;
43:335–46.
Holley SR, Pasch L, Bleil ME, Gregorich S, Katz PK, Adler NE. Prevalence and
predictors of major depressive disorder for fertility treatment patients and
their partners. Fertil Steril 2015;105:1332–9.
Rockliff H, Lightman S, Rhidian E, Buchanan H, Gordon U, Vedhara K. A systematic review of psychosocial factors associated with emotional adjustment
in in vitro fertilization patients. Hum Reprod Update 2014;20:594–613.
Golombok S, Elioi E, Blake L, Roman G, Jadva V. A longitudinal study of families formed through reproductive donation: parent adolescent relationships
and adolescent adjustment at age 14. Dev Psychol 2017;53:1966–77.
Jadva V, Freeman T, Kramer W, Golombok S. Sperm and oocyte donors’
experiences of anonymous donation and subsequent contact with their
donor offspring. Hum Reprod Update 2011;26:638–45.

628.

629.
630.

631.

632.
633.

634.

635.
636.
637.
638.

639.
640.
641.
642.
643.

Soderstrom-Anttila V, Wennerholm U, Loft A, Pinborg A, Aittomaki K,
Romundstad L, Bergh C. Surrogacy: outcomes for surrogate mothers, children and the resulting families- a systematic review. Hum Reprod Update
2016;22:260–76.
Donnez J, Dolmans M. Fertility preservation in women. N Eng J Med 2017;
377:1657–65.
Letourneau J, Ebbel E, Katz P, Katz A, Wei Z, Ai A, et al. Pretreatment fertility counseling and fertility preservation improve quality of
life in reproductive age women with cancer. Cancer 2012;118:
1710–7.
Dolmans M, Hollanders de Ouden S, Demylle D, Pirard C. Utilization and
results of long term embryo cryopreservation before gonadotoxic treatment. J Assist Reprod Genet 2015;32:1233–7.
Argyle C, Harper J, Davies M. Oocyte cryopreservation: where are we now?
Hum Reprod Update 2016;22:440–9.
Greenfeld DA, Seli E. Same-sex reproduction: medical treatment options
and psychosocial considerations. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 2016;28:
202–5.
Brown S. ESHRE: the ﬁrst 21 years. New York: Oxford University Press;
2005, Availabe at: https://www.eshre.eu//media/sitecore-ﬁles/AboutESHRE/The-ﬁrst-21-years.pdf.
Edwards RG, Bavister BD, Steptoe PC. Early stages of fertilization in vitro of
human oocytes matured in vitro. Nature 1969;221:632–5.
Johnson MH. Robert Edwards: the path to IVF. Reprod Biomed Online
2011;23:245–62.
De Kretzer D, Dennis P, Hudson B, Leeton J, Lopata A, Outch K, et al. Transfer of a human zygote. Lancet 1973;2:728–9.
Cohen J, Trounson A, Dawson K, Jones H, Hazekamp J, Nygren KG,
Hamberger L. The early days of IVF outside the UK. Hum Reprod Update
2005;5:439–59.
Duka WE, DeCherney AH. From the beginning. A history of the American
Fertility Society 1944-1994. Alabama: American Fertility Society; 1994.
Noyes RW, Hertig AT, Rock J. Dating the endometrial biopsy. Fertil Steril
1950;1:3–25.
Rock J, Menkin MF. In vitro fertilization and cleavage of human ovarian
eggs. Science 1944;100:105–7.
Menkin MF, Rock J. In vitro fertilization and cleavage of human ovarian
eggs. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1948;55:440–52.
United Nations Population Fund. Programme of action. Adopted at the International Conference on Population and Development. Cairo: Egypt;
September 5-13, 1994. 2004. Available at: https://www.unfpa.org/sites/
default/ﬁles/event-pdf/PoA_en.pdf.

Fertility and Sterility® (ISSN 0015-0282) is a registered trademark of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine and is published monthly in two volumes by Elsevier
Inc., 230 Park Avenue, Suite 800, New York, NY 10169-0901, USA. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY and at additional mailing ofﬁces (not valid for journal supplements). Membership dues to the American Society for Reproductive Medicine include $50.00 for Fertility and Sterility®. Publication of an advertisement or other product
mentioned in Fertility and Sterility should not be construed as an endorsement of the product or the manufacturer’s claim. Statements and opinions expressed in articles and
communications herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the editors, publisher, or the American Society for Reproductive Medicine or any organizations
endorsing this journal. Subscriptions: Personal Rates: US$483.00 (USA and Canada), US$682.00 (all other countries); Students: US$183.00 (USA and Canada),
US$181.00 (all other countries). Prices include postage and are subject to change without notice. Orders, claims, and journal inquiries: Please visit our Support Hub page
https://service.elsevier.com for assistance.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to Fertility and Sterility, Elsevier, Journal Returns, 1799 Highway 50 East, Linn, MO 65051, USA.

Copyright ª2018 American Society for Reproductive Medicine

324
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE 1

Cumulative live birth rates (CLBRs) with 5–15 oocytes according to
age (from Donnez J, Dolmans M, N Engl J Med 2017;377:1657–65
and adapted from Cobo et al., Fertil Steril 2016;105:755–64).
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
324.e1
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE 2

According to Silber: technique of fresh ovarian tissue transplantation (between monozygotic twins). The ovarian graft is attached with the use of
interrupted 9-0 nylon sutures under optical magniﬁcation.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

324.e2
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE 3
Four Parameter Logistic
140

FSH Leve
els (mIU/ml)

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0

50

100

150
200
250
Days Since Transplant

300

350

FSH returns to normal earlier (1.5 mo) after fresh vs. frozen ovary
tissue transplantation; because with fresh transplantation we do
not destroy all of the primary developing follicles, whereas with
frozen transplantation we destroy all except the primordial resting
follicles. Therefore, frozen transplantations are a more reliable
indication of the time it requires for primordial follicles to reach the
gonadotropin-sensitive stage once they are recruited.
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
324.e3
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

40 YEARS OF IVF

SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE 4

Two genetically different sisters were operated on simultaneously in contiguous operating rooms. Ovarian tissue was laparoscopically removed
from the donor’s ovary and immediately sutured to the recipient’s ovarian medulla (from Donnez et al., Fertility Sterility 2011;96:1407–11).
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

324.e4
VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fertility and Sterility®

SUPPLEMENTAL TABLE 1
Indications for fertility preservation.
A) Malignant diseases most frequently requiring gonadotoxic
chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy or bone marrow
transplantation:
 Hematologic diseases (leukemia, Hodgkin lymphoma,
non-Hodgkin lymphoma)
 Breast cancer
 Sarcoma
 Some pelvic cancers
B) Benign conditions for which fertility preservation is indicated:
1. Nononcologic systemic diseases requiring chemotherapy/
radiotherapy and/or bone marrow transplantation
2. Nonmalignant ovarian diseases
 Bilateral ovarian tumors
 Severe and recurrent ovarian endometriosis
 Risk of ovarian torsion
3. Risk of premature ovarian insufﬁciency
 Family history
 Turner syndrome
C) Social reasons:
 Age
 Childbearing postponed to later in life
Forty years of IVF. Fertil Steril 2018.

VOL. 110 NO. 2 / JULY 2018
324.e5
Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

