Intra-operative Postperfusion Micronephrolithotomy for Renal
Allograft Lithiasis: A Case Report
E. Favia, N. Raisonb, S. Zanettic, G. Sampognac, E. Montanaric, and M. Ferraressoa,d,*
a
Kidney Transplantation, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy; bMRC Centre for Transplantation,
King’s College London, London, UK; cUrology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy; and
d
Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, Milan, Italy

ABSTRACT
Increasing demand drives the expansion of criteria for kidney donation, and nephrolithiasis
is now considered a relative contraindication. We report for the ﬁrst time a case of
intra-operative, postperfusion kidney allograft micronephrolithotomy. A 64-year-old man
with end-stage renal disease secondary to Alport syndrome underwent primary deceased
donor kidney transplantation at our center. Pre-operative ultrasound of the donor
identiﬁed a 7-mm calculus in the anterior, lower pole calyx. The kidney was extraperitoneally implanted in the right iliac fossa and reperfused homogenously. Stone
retrieval with a ﬂexible ureteroscope failed due to the narrow calyceal infundibulum.
Instead, the calculus was removed using the micropercutaneous nephrolithotomy system
under ultrasonographic guidance. The calyx was punctured using a 4.85 Fr needle and the
stone was fragmented to dust using a Holmium laser. No bleeding was observed. The
post-operative course was uneventful. Outpatient follow up demonstrated good function of
the graft which was stone free on ultrasound. Postperfusion micropercutaneous
nephrolithotomy for kidney allograft calculi offers a safe and feasible option when
pre-operative or intra-operative retrograde intrarenal surgery fails.

P

ERSISTENT shortages of allografts have compelled
transplant teams to widen criteria for organ donation.
Historically, renal calculi were considered an absolute
contraindication. However, with the increased detection of
small, asymptomatic stones in functionally normal kidneys,
there has been increasing recognition that renal calculi
should be seen only as a relative contraindication.
Improving experience in managing donor lithiasis is
reﬂected in the variety of approaches applied to its management [1]. Miniaturized percutaneous nephrolithotomy
(PCNL) such as the microperc system is increasingly being
used to treat nephrolithiasis [2]. The procedure is generally
performed under ultrasonography using a 3-component 4.85
Fr all-seeing needle. The 3-way port allows to simultaneously introduce a ﬁber optic device, a laser ﬁber, and an
irrigation system. The main indication for miniaturized
PCNL is solitary lithiasis of the kidney with low-density
stones less than 1000 mm3 in volume [3]. Nevertheless,
successful treatment of ureteral, bladder, and urethral
calculi has been recently reported [4].
0041-1345/18
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.transproceed.2018.05.017

3950

We herein describe for the ﬁrst time a case of
successful intra-operative, postperfusion allograft micronephrolithotomy.
CASE REPORT
A 64-year-old man with end-stage renal disease secondary to
Alport syndrome was admitted for a primary deceased donor
kidney transplant on March 2017. Pretransplant comorbidities
included hypertension, chronic gastritis, and secondary hyperparathyroidism. The donor was a 78-year-old man who died from
spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage (expanded criteria donation
after brain death donor). A routine ultrasound scan performed
before the organ procurement showed a 7-mm stone in the

*Address correspondence to Mariano Ferraresso, Department
of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan,
Via Della Commenda 12, 20122 Milan, Italy. Tel: 0039 02 5503
5656; Fax: 0039 02 5503 5650. E-mail: mariano.ferraresso@
unimi.it
ª 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
230 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10169

Transplantation Proceedings, 50, 3950e3953 (2018)

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

RENAL ALLOGRAFT LITHIASIS

3951

Fig 2. Ultrasound-guided puncture of the anterior, lower pole
calyx of the transplanted kidney.

Fig 1. Renal ultrasound of the donor demonstrating a 7-mm
calculus in the anterior, lower pole calyx.

anterior, lower pole calyx (Fig 1). Ante mortem serum creatinine
concentration was 1.2 mg/dL with undetectable proteinuria.
Organ procurement was uneventful with a warm ischemia time of
2 minutes. The allograft was preserved on static cold storage
(Celsior organ preservation solution, Institut Georges Lopez,
Lissieu, France) with a cold ischemia time of 12 hours and
40 minutes. The kidney was large-sized, had 1 artery, 1 vein, and 1
ureter. The donor and the recipient were blood-group compatible
and had a 5 HLA antigen mismatch. The highest recipient panel
reactivity antibody was 0%. Flow- and direct-microcytotoxicity
cross-match were negative. The graft was extraperitoneally
positioned in the right iliac fossa. The renal vein was anastomosed
end-to-side to the common iliac vein and the renal artery
was anastomosed side-to-end to the external iliac artery with two
5/0 prolene running sutures. After unclamping, the kidney
reperfused slowly but homogenously. At this stage, stone retrieval
was attempted with ﬂexible ureteroscopy. However, the calyceal
infundibulum was too narrow to accommodate the ureteroscope
and the procedure was abandoned. Instead a microperc PCNL set
was used to remove the calculus (Polydiagnost GmbH, Hallbergmoos, Germany). Under ultrasound guidance (Fig 2), the
calyx was punctured using a 4.85 Fr needle and a tract was
developed (Fig 3). The stone was visualized and fragmented to
dust using a Holmium laser (Fig 4). No bleeding was observed at
the puncture site. The lithotripsy took 35 minutes with no
immediate complications (supporting video 1). A double JJ 6 Fr
ureteral stent was placed and the transplant ureter anastomosed
to the bladder according to the Lich-Gregoire technique using 5/
0 polydioxanone sutures. The entire procedure took 240 minutes
and the intra-operative blood loss was 100 mL. Immunosuppression consisted of anti-thymocyte globulin (Thymoglobulin, SanoﬁAventis Canada Inc., Quebec, Canada), tacrolimus (Adoport,
Sandoz International GmbH, Holzkirchen, Germany), mycophenolate mofetil (Myfenax, Teva B.V., Haarlem, Netherlands), and

a steroid. The postoperative course was uneventful. The recipient
was discharged after 9 days with no hematuria and improving
graft function. The stent was easily removed by ﬂexible cystoscopy
on postoperative day 30. Outpatient follow up on day 44
demonstrated good graft function with ultrasound conﬁrming the
absence of allograft lithiasis.

DISCUSSION

Given the high demands on the limited organ supply, the
drive to extend the potential donor pool has been a key
challenge facing transplant surgeons. Although recurrent
stone-formers and patients with metabolic stone diseases
are still considered not suitable for donation, there is now a
signiﬁcant body of evidence to support the transplantation
of renal allografts found to have calculi [5].
Most of the time, small stones (< 4 mm) can safely be left
in situ and followed up with ultrasound for early signs of
complications [5]. For calculi that require intervention a

Fig 3. Puncture of the anterior, lower pole calyx of the transplanted kidney.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3952

Fig 4. Micronephrolithotomy holmium laser fragmentation of
the calculus.

number of options are available. Direct nephrotomy with
stone removal and parenchymal suture represents the
traditional approach. A 2-stage procedure can be employed
whereby retrograde intrarenal surgery (RIRS) or shockwave
lithotripsy is used to render the graft stone-free before
transplantation [6]. Recent data have shown that singlestage procedures can be equally effective. Most
commonly, ex vivo RIRS is performed and stones either
removed directly using a basket or fragmented with laser
lithotripsy [7e9]. The technique appears safe with a good
success rate but a number of failed attempts at RIRS have
been reported. In the majority of cases, surgeons proceeded
to transplantation with the stone in situ [7,9,10].
Despite the evidence that small stones may not necessarily affect graft function or jeopardize outcome, the risk of
stone-related complications in transplant recipients should
not be underestimated. Denervated allografts may not
present with classic renal colic rather less speciﬁc signs of
reduced urine output, rising creatinine or hydronephrosis.
Immunosuppressed patients are also more susceptible to
infections than general population and treatment options
may be often limited by comorbidities, suboptimal renal
function, or drug-related side effects. Furthermore, should a
calculus within a graft require intervention at a later stage,

FAVI, RAISON, ZANETTI ET AL

access to a transplant ureter is much more difﬁcult. As a
result, it can be argued that all attempts should be made to
render the allograft stone-free before implantation.
Compared to standard nephrotomy, the micronephrolithotomy technique herein described allows surgeons to reduce the risk of bleeding, urinary leakage, and
scarring. It also offers a further minimally invasive approach
for patients in whom RIRS is not possible or has failed.
Stone removal by RIRS or nephrotomy in a kidney
allograft is generally performed ex vivo, under cold preservation. Even though there are no studies comparing
pre-operative and intra-operative stone removal techniques in kidney transplantation, it is common opinion that
ex vivo procedures are easier and potentially safer than
their in vivo counterparts. In this case, we opted for postperfusion stone removal because we did not want to
excessively extend cold ischemia time, which was already
over 12 hours. It is well known that cold ischemia time has
a detrimental impact on graft outcomes and this is
particularly true for fast track, expanded criteria, and
donation after circulatory death kidneys [11]. At the time
we benched the organ, there were no urologists available to
attempt RIRS as they were in theater for an emergency
operation. Rather than leaving the stone in situ or further
increasing cold ischemia time, we preferred to proceed
with the transplant and remove the stone after reperfusion.
The micronephrolithotomy was not planned in advance,
but was proposed by urologists after RIRS failure. As far
as we know, there are no reports describing such a
procedure in a transplant peri-operative setting either
ex vivo or in vivo. Certainly, it may be argued that in vivo
techniques can be more challenging, however, they may
also offer several theoretical advantages such as prompt
assessment of any intrarenal injury and avoidance of unnecessary manipulation of the kidney [12].
Our report demonstrates the feasibility of intra-operative,
postperfusion micronephrolithotomy for renal allograft
stone removal. This encouraging result in vivo may serve as
a basis for further investigation both in vivo and ex vivo.
REFERENCES
[1] Wong KA, Olsburgh J. Management of stones in renal
transplant. Curr Opin Urol 2013;23:175e9.
[2] Desai MR, Sharma R, Mishra S, Sabnis RB, Stief C,
Bader M. Single-step percutaneous nephrolithotomy (microperc):
the initial clinical report. J Urol 2011;186:140e5.
[3] Ganpule AP, Bhattu AS, Desai M. PCNL in the twenty-ﬁrst
century: role of Microperc, Miniperc, and Ultraminiperc. World J
Urol 2015;33:235e40.
[4] Ganpule AP, Chhabra JS, Sudharsan SB, Jairath A,
Vijaykumar M, Sabnis R, et al. Extending indications of micropercutaneous nephrolithotomy: It is not just about cracking stones.
Arab J Urol 2017;15:17e23.
[5] Martin G, Sundaram CP, Sharfuddin A, Govani M. Asymptomatic urolithiasis in living donor transplant kidneys: initial results.
Urology 2007;70:2e6.
[6] Ganpule A, Vyas JB, Sheladia C, Mishra S, Ganpule SA,
Sabnis RB, et al. Management of urolithiasis in live-related kidney
donors. J Endourol 2013;27:245e50.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

RENAL ALLOGRAFT LITHIASIS
[7] Pushkar P, Agarwal A, Kumar S, Guleria S. Endourological
management of live donors with urolithiasis at the time of donor
nephrectomy: a single center experience. Int Urol Nephrol 2015;47:
1123e7.
[8] Devasia A, Chacko N, Gnanaraj L, Cherian R,
Gopalakrishnan G. Stone-bearing live-donor kidneys for transplantation. BJU Int 2005;95:394e7.
[9] Olsburgh J, Thomas K, Wong K, Bultitude M, Glass J,
Rottenberg G, et al. Incidental renal stones in potential live kidney
donors: prevalence, assessment and donation, including role of
ex vivo ureteroscopy. BJU Int 2013;111:784e92.

3953
[10] Rashid MG, Konnak JW, Wolf Jr JS, Punch JD, Magee JC,
Arenas JD, et al. Ex vivo ureteroscopic treatment of calculi in donor
kidneys at renal transplantation. J Urol 2004;171:58e60.
[11] Sampaio MS, Chopra B, Tang A, Sureshkumar KK.
Impact of cold ischemia time on the outcomes of kidneys with
Kidney Donor Proﬁle Index 85%: mate kidneys analysis - a
retrospective study [e-pub ahead of print]. Transpl Int 2018;31:
729e38.
[12] Ansari H, Tomar V, Yadav SS, Agarwal N. Study of predictive factors affecting the prolonged urinary leakage after
percutaneous nephrolithotomy. Urol Ann 2016;8:60e5.

Downloaded for PD Hinduja Hospital (library@hindujahospital.com) at National Hospital & Education Society - JC from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on March 02, 2019.
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2019. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

